 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
CLINICAL GUIDELINES  
FOR THE MANAGEMENT  
OF  
CORONARY HEART DISEASE  
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
1 
 
Table of Contents 
 
 
 
1. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
2. 
DEFINITION OF CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE  
 
3. 
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY  
 
4. 
GRADING OF ANGINA PECTORIS 
 
5. 
CHRONIC STABLE ANGINA  
 
5.1 
Clinical Presentation 
5.2 
Examination and Investigation 
5.3 
Differential Diagnosis 
5.4 
Management 
5.5 
Follow-up 
5.6 
Indications for referral to cardiologist 
5.7 
Key points 
 
 
6. ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROMES 
 
6.1 
Unstable Angina and non ST elevation acute myocardial infarction 
6.1.1 Clinical Presentation 
6.1.2 History, Examination and Investigations 
6.1.3 Differential Diagnosis  
6.1.4 Management 
6.1.5 Follow-up and Second Prevention 
6.1.6 Indications for Referral to Cardiologist 
6.1.7 Key Points 
 
6.2 
Acute Coronary Syndromes – ST elevation acute myocardial infarction 
6.2.1 Clinical Presentation  
6.2.2 Examination and Investigations 
6.2.3 Differential Diagnosis  
6.2.4 Management 
6.2.5 Follow-up & Rehabilitation 
6.2.6 Post-infarction Evaluation & Secondary Prevention 
6.2.7 Key Points 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
2 
1. 
INTRODUCTION  
 
 
Of the cardiovascular diseases, acute myocardial infarction is the most common 
cause of death.  The incidence of acute myocardial infarction is estimated at 
around 4,000/year in Mauritius, with a total mortality rate of 30% - 40% and a 
25%-35% mortality rate before reaching the hospital.  The underlying cause in 
most cases is atherosclerotic coronary artery disease. 
 
 
These clinical guidelines on the management of coronary artery disease have been 
developed in this context in line with the decentralization and re-organization of 
the Ministry of Health’s NCD programme. 
 
 
They aim at improving the quality of health care through: 
 
1. 
recommendations for active primary prevention of coronary artery disease 
and its risk factors. 
 
2. 
the improvement and standardization of the management of patients 
suffering from coronary artery disease. 
 
The recommendations made are, to a large extent, evidence-based. 
 
The development of the guidelines is the combined effort of cardiologists, a 
consultant in Internal Medicine and community physicians in association with the 
Mauritius Institute of Health.  It has sought consensus between the policy makers 
at the Ministry of Health, cardiologists at hospital level and community 
physicians at primary care level after having taken cognizance of local realities, 
limitations and scope for further development. 
 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
3 
2. 
DEFINITION OF CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE  
 
Coronary artery disease results from an imbalance between myocardial oxygen 
supply and demand and is most commonly caused by the inability of 
atherosclerotic coronary arteries to perfuse the heart due to partial or total 
occlusion of the coronary arteries.  Chronic angina pectoris is, by definition, 
stable, i.e., the severity and/or frequency of chest pain is not increasing or 
occurring at rest. Unstable angina, myocardial infarction and sudden ischaemic 
death are also manifestations of chronic ischaemic heart disease, presenting as 
acute coronary syndromes. 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
4 
3. 
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY  
 
 
Myocardial ischaemia occurs when myocardial oxygen delivery cannot meet 
metabolic myocardial demands.  This discrepancy is termed supply-demand 
mismatch.  Although this term is overly simplistic, myocardial oxygen delivery is 
mostly determined by the oxygen-carrying capacity of blood and coronary flow. 
 
 
In normal coronary arteries, coronary blood flow can increase three to fivefold in 
response to exercise.  This increase, termed coronary flow reserve, occurs mostly 
through decreased resistance in coronary microcirculation.  Significant 
atherosclerotic plaquing in epicardial coronary arteries (> 75% cross-sectional 
area) results in a drop in blood pressure across the stenotic lesion.  Coronary 
arterioles dilate to compensate for the reduced distal perfusion pressure, 
maintaining normal resting coronary blood flow.  Consequently, at rest, most 
patients with significant coronary artery stenosis obstructions have no ischaemia 
and therefore no angina.  During exercise, however, the capacity of coronary 
arterioles to dilate further is limited, and the myocardial oxygen demand soon 
outstrips the supply, resulting in ischaemia, followed usually by angina. 
 
 
Acute coronary syndromes share a common pathophysiology: acute rupture 
(fissuration or ulceration) of a lipid-rich intracoronary atheromatous plaque, with 
subsequent mobilisation of a sequence of inflammatory and thrombotic cascades 
culminating in the formation of thrombus. 
 
 
The possible triggers of acute plaque rupture are: sheer stress, inflammation and 
increased neurohormonal tone.  Certain plaques are more susceptible to acute 
rupture than others – for example those which are eccentric, with a lipid-rich 
vulnerable core, a high content of active inflammatory cells, and a thin fibrous 
cap.  Rupture of the plaque (ulceration/fissuration), with exposure of the highly 
thrombogenic contents to the bloodstream, initiates a cascade of cytokine release, 
inflammatory cell activation and platelet activation, with resulting platelet 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
5 
aggregation and formation of occluding thrombus.  As a result, the patient may 
present with one or more of the following: 
 
1. If the vessel lumen is completely occluded or if inadequate collateralisation is 
present, transmural myocardial injury and subsequent infarction occurs, 
with ST elevation (or new left bundle branch block) most commonly seen on 
the electrocardiogram (ECG). 
 
2. If following plaque rupture, however, incomplete occlusion of the lumen 
occurs or sufficient collateral flow exists, ischaemia or nontransmural 
injury results, with or without injury. 
 
3. If ischaemia occurs without injury (i.e, with negative serial enzyme 
measurements), the clinical condition is termed unstable angina (UA).  If cell 
injury is demonstrated by serial measurements of cardiac enzymes, non-ST 
elevation MI is diagnosed.  (See Figure 1 below). 
 
Figure 1:  Schematic Representation of Relationship between chronic Coronary 
Artery Disease and Acute Coronary Syndromes 
 
CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE 
 
Stable Coronary Artery Disease 
 
 
Acute Coronary Syndromes 
 
      No ST-elevation on ECG        ST-elevation on ECG 
 
Stable Angina  
 
 
 
Unstable  
   Non-ST 
 
ST-Elevation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Angina 
Elevation MI  
       MI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         Non-Q wave      Q wave       Q wave     Non Q wave 
 
     MI  
  MI 
         MI 
      MI 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
6 
 
4. 
GRADING OF ANGINA PECTORIS 
(According to the Canadian Cardiovascular Society 
Classification System) 
 
 
Class I: 
Ordinary physical activity (e.g. walking, climbing stairs) does not 
cause angina. 
 
 
 
Class II: 
Slight limitation of ordinary activity  
 
Angina occurs on walking or climbing stairs rapidly, walking 
uphill, walking or climbing stairs after meals or in cold, in wind, 
under emotional stress, or during the few hours after awakening.   
 
Angina occurs on walking more than two blocks on the level and 
climbing more than one flight of ordinary stairs at a normal pace 
and in normal condition. 
 
 
Class III: 
Marked limitation of ordinary physical activity. Angina occurs on 
walking one to two blocks on the level and climbing one flight of 
stairs in normal conditions and at a normal pace. 
 
 
Class IV: 
Inability to carry out any physical activity without discomfort – 
anginal symptoms may be present at rest. 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
7 
5. 
CHRONIC STABLE ANGINA  
 
5.1 
CLINICAL PRESENTATION  
 
Character: 
usually described more often as a discomfort, pressure, heaviness, 
or squeezing sensation and less often as a pain. Sometimes 
described as a burning or sharp sensation. 
 
Location: 
substernal area, precordium or epigastrium with radiation to the 
left arm, jaw or neck, less commonly felt only in radiation area and 
not in the chest. 
 
Precipitation:  often provoked by exertion, cold weather, eating, smoking and 
strong emotions.  Relieved by rest, removal of provoking factors, 
or sublingual nitrates. 
 
 
Duration: 
  few minutes usually, rarely more than 4-5 minutes. 
 
History: 
description of the chest discomfort and its relationship to activity. 
Past history of HBP, DM, hyperlipidaemia, or smoking or a family 
history of premature IHD in lst degree relatives (age younger than 
55 yrs). 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
8 
5.2 
CLINICAL EXAMINATION AND INVESTIGATIONS 
 
5.2.1 Clinical Examination 
 
 
Often normal. 
To look for confirmatory information, i.e., hypertension, peripheral artery disease, 
xanthelasma, tendinous xanthomata, tobacco-stained fingers or teeth.  Episodic 
ischaemia alters left ventricular compliance, thus a transient S4, S3, may be heard 
during an acute ischaemic episode. 
 
5.2.2 Investigations 
 
 
(i) 
Basic screening : 
 
• Fasting blood glucose  
• Serum lipids including high density lipoproteins (HDL) and 
triglycerides  
• Full blood count  
• Blood urea and electrolytes 
• Serum urates 
 
 
(ii) 
ECG: 
 
• Often normal in the absence of myocardial infarction or left ventricular 
hypertrophy. 
 
• An ECG during an episode of angina may show transient ST 
depression, T wave inversion or ventricular arrythmias (VPB; isolated 
or in runs, monomorph or polymorph). An ambulatory ECG (Holter) 
may demonstrate ischaemic episodes with or without symptoms ‘Silent 
Ischaemia’. 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
9 
 
(iii) 
Echocardiogram: 
 
• May demonstrate wall motion abnormalities suggestive of ischaemia 
or of infarction. 
 
(iv) 
Exercise Stress Testing (EST): 
 
• Is a sensitive and informative examination, particularly useful in the 
detection and quantification of chronic ischaemic heart disease in 
patients who are at increased risk. 
 
Indications: 
 
• Differential diagnosis of chest pain, i.e., evaluation of patients with 
symptoms suggestive of IHD. 
• Assessment of the threshold of angina in patient with known IHD. 
• Evaluation of therapy for angina 
• Evaluation of the asymptomatic patient over 40 yrs who has multiple 
risk factors for IHD. 
 
 
 
Contraindications: 
 
• Recent acute MI (4-6 weeks), except for submaximal effort. 
• Unstable angina 
• Rapid ventricular or atrial arrhythmia 
• Advanced atrio-ventricular (A-V) block 
• Decompensated, uncontrolled congestive heart failure 
• Acute noncardiac illness 
• Severe aortic stenosis, hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy 
(HOCM) 
• BP more than 170/100 before onset of exercise 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
10
(v) 
Coronary angiography: 
 
• Not necessarily needed in all patients with chronic stable angina to 
confirm the diagnosis. 
 
• It allows the localization and quantification of obstructive lesions, 
evaluation of left ventricular (LV) function and assessment of valvular 
or myocardial disease. 
 
Indications: 
 
• Angina refractory to medical management 
• Angina or MI in patients less than 45 yrs of age 
• Unstable angina (after medical stabilization) 
• Patients with persistent angina and/or low level EST abnormalities 
after MI. 
• Marked ST changes at low-level exercise or persisting several minutes 
after cessation of EST. 
• Patients with life-treating arrhythmia associated with IHD. 
• Suspected Prinzmetal’s (variant) angina (coronary vasospasm) 
 
5.3 
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS 
• Oesophageal reflux 
• Chronic gastritis 
• Musculoskeletal pain 
• costochondritis 
• Chronic pancreatitis 
• Chronic dissecting aorta 
• Pneumothorax 
• Pericarditis 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
11
 
5.4 
MANAGEMENT 
 
The treatment of chronic ischaemic heart disease has two major goals: 
 
(i) 
to prevent myocardial infarction (MI) and death, thereby improving life 
expectancy.   
(ii) 
to reduce symptoms of angina and the occurrence of ischaemia, which 
should improve quality of life. 
 
Medical therapy with aggressive cardiovascular risk factor modification is the 
cornerstone of therapy for chronic ischaemic heart disease.  This holds true for 
patients being treated either medically or with coronary revascularization.  The 
treatment strategies for chronic stable angina is separated into two important 
divisions: 
 
(1) 
anti-anginal therapy and 
(2) 
education and risk factor modification. 
 
5.4.1 Anti-anginal therapy 
 
Conditions that exacerbate and provoke angina should be considered; these 
include medications such as vasodilators, excessive thyroid replacement therapy, 
and vasoconstrictors.  Medical problems such as profound anaemia, uncontrolled 
hypertension, hyperthyroidism, and hypoxemia should also be considered.  
Primary cardiac disorders such as tachy-and brady-arrhythmias, valvular heart 
disease (especially aortic stenosis), and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy may also 
exacerbate angina pectoris and should be excluded.  Careful attention to history, 
thorough physical examination, and selection of appropriate laboratory and other  
diagnostic studies can help identify these clinical conditions. 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
12
β-blockers 
 
β-blockers decrease heart rate, contractility and arterial pressure, resulting in 
decreased myocardial oxygen demand.  In patients with chronic stable exertional 
angina, β-blockers decrease heart rate and blood pressure during exercise, and the 
onset of angina (ischaemic threshold) is delayed or avoided.  Various types of β-
blockers are available for the treatment of hypertension and angina (Table 1).  All 
β-blockers appear to be equally effective in reducing angina pectoris.  In the 
treatment of stable angina, it is conventional to adjust the dose of these drugs to 
reduce the resting heart rate to 50-60 beats per minute. 
 
Table 1: Properties of β-blockers in clinical use 
 
Drugs 
Selectivity 
Partial agonist 
activity 
Usual dose for 
angina 
Propranolol 
None 
No 
20-80 mg bid 
Metoprolol 
β1 
No 
50-200 mg bid 
Atenolol 
β1 
No 
50-200 mg bid 
Nadolol 
None 
No 
40-80 mg qd 
Timolol 
None 
No 
10 mg bid 
Acebutolol 
β1 
Yes 
200-600 mg bid 
Betaxolol 
β1 
No 
10-20 mg qd 
Bisoprolol 
β1 
No 
10 mg qd 
Esmolol 
(intravenous) 
β1 
No 
50-300 mg/kg/min 
Labetalol* 
None 
No 
200-600 mg bid 
Carvedilol* 
None 
No 
12.5-50 mg bid 
 
* combined α- and β-blocker. 
bid- twice a day ; qd – every day; tid – three times a day 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
13
The absolute cardiac contraindications for the use of β-blockers are severe 
bradycardia, pre-existing high degree atrioventricular block, sick sinus syndrome, 
and severe decompensated left ventricular failure (β-blockers have now been 
shown to reduce total mortality in patients with compensated heart failure). β-
blockers  should also be avoided in patients with pure vasospastic angina 
(Prinzmetal angina) because these agents may induce coronary vasospasm from 
unopposed α-receptor activity. Asthma and bronchospastic disease, severe 
depression, and severe peripheral vascular disease are relative contraindications.  
Most diabetic patients tolerate β-blockers, although these agents should be used 
cautiously in patients who require insulin.  In the absence of contraindications, β-
blockers are preferred as initial therapy.  The evidence for this approach is 
strongest in patients with a history of prior MI, for which this class of drugs has 
been shown to reduce mortality. 
 
Calcium antagonists 
 
Calcium antagonists effectively treat hypertension and angina pectoris.  These 
agents are commonly divided into the dihydropyridine and nondihydropyridine 
classes (Table 2).  Calcium antagonists decrease coronary vascular resistance and 
increase coronary blood flow.  All of these agents cause dilatation of the 
epicardial coronary vessels and the microcirculation arteriolar resistance vessels.  
Dilatation of the epicardial coronary arteries is the principal mechanism that 
allows calcium antagonists to relieve vasospastic angina.  Calcium antagonists 
also concurrently decrease myocardial oxygen demand, primarily by reduction of 
systemic vascular resistance and reduction in arterial pressure.  In addition, 
certain calcium antagonists (verapamil and diltiazem) reduce myocardial oxygen 
demand by decreasing heart rate and contractility. 
 
 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
14
Table 2: Properties of  calcium antagonists in clinical use  
 
Drugs 
Usual dose 
Duration of 
action 
Side effects 
Dihydropyridines 
 
 
 
Nifedipine 
Immediate release: 30-90 
mg daily orally  
Slow release: 30-180 mg 
orally 
Short 
Hypotension, 
dizziness, flushing, 
nausea, constipation, 
edema 
 
Amlodipine 
5-10 mg qd 
Long 
Headache, edema 
Felodipine 
5-10 mg qd 
Long  
Headache, edema 
Isradipine 
2.5-10 mg bid 
Medium 
Headache, fatigue 
Nicardipine 
20-40 mg tid 
Short 
Headache, dizziness, 
flushing, edema 
Non-dihydropyridines 
Bepridil 
200-400 mg qd 
Long 
Arrhythmias, 
dizziness, nausea 
Diltiazem 
Immediate release: 30-80 
mg 4 times daily 
Short 
Hypotension, 
dizziness, flushing, 
bradycardia, edema 
 
Slow release: 120-320 mg 
qd 
Long 
 
Verapamil 
Immediate release: 80-160 
mg tid 
Slow release: 120-480 mg 
qd 
Short  
 
Long 
Hypotension, 
myocardial 
depression, heart 
failure, edema, 
bradycardia 
 
bid – twice a day; qd – every day; tid - three times a day 
 
Short-acting dihydropyridine calcium antagonists have the potential to enhance 
the risk of adverse cardiac events and should be avoided.  Long-acting calcium 
antagonists of the dihydro-and nondihydropyridine class relieve angina and are 
appropriate initial therapy in patients with contraindications to β-blockers.  They 
can also be substituted for β-blockers in patients who develop unacceptable side 
effects or can be used in combination with β-blockers when initial β-blockers 
therapy is unsuccessful. 
 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
15
Nitrates 
 
Nitrates dilate epicardial coronary arteries and arterioles and reduce cardiac 
preload.  They also relieve coronary spasm and dynamic stenoses, especially at 
epicardial sites.  Their use is associated with reflex tachycardia, an effect that may 
increase myocardial oxygen demand.  This response may be blunted by the 
concomitant administration of β-blockers or calcium antagonists, such as 
diltiazem or verapamil, which slow conduction. 
 
Nitrates are available in multiple preparations exhibiting wide duration in clinical 
effect (Table 3).  Short-acting nitrates, which are most often administered as 
sublingual tablets or buccal mucosal spray, are commonly used to treat acute 
episodes of angina.  Unless contraindications exist, all patients with chronic stable 
angina should be given a short-acting nitrate and should be properly instucted in 
its use.  The efficacy and action of long-acting nitrates depend on the dosing, 
bioavailability, and half-life of the various preparations. The most important 
aspect of long-term nitrate therapy is to ensure an adequate nitrate-free interval 
(typically night time), which will prevent nitrate tolerance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
16
Table 3:  Properties of nitrates in clinical use 
 
 
Compound 
Route 
Dose 
Duration of effect 
Sublingual tablets 
0.3-0.6 mg up to 1.5 mg 
Short 2-3 minutes 
Spray 
0.4 mg as needed 
Short 2-3 minutes 
Ointment 
2% 6 X 6 in., 15 X 15 cm  
7.5-40 mg 
Effect up to 7 h 
Transdermal 
0.2—0.8 mg/h every 12 h 
8-12 h during 
intermittent therapy 
Oral sustained 
release 
2.5-13 mg 
4-8 h 
Buccal 
1-3 mg 3 times daily 
3-5 h 
Nitroglycerin 
Intravenous 
5-200 µg/min. 
Tolerance in 7-8 h 
Sublingual 
2.5-15 mg 
Up to 60 min. 
Oral 
5-80 mg, 2-3 times daily 
Up to 8h 
Spray 
1.25 mg on tongue as 
needed 
2-3 min. 
Chewable 
5 mg 
2-2.5 h 
Oral slow release 
40 mg 1-2 times daily 
Up to 8 h 
Intravenous 
1.25-5.0 mg/h 
Tolerance in 7-8 h 
Isosorbide dinitrate 
Ointment 
100 mg/24 h 
Not effective 
20 mg twice daily 
Isosorbide-5- 
mononitrate 
Oral 
60-240 mg once daily 
12-24 h 
 
 
 
 
 
In patients with exertional stable angina, nitrates improve exercise tolerance, 
increase the time to onset of angina, and decrease ST-segment depression during 
treadmill exercise testing.  Combined with β-blockers or calcium antagonists, 
nitrates produce greater anti-anginal and anti-ischaemic effects in patients with 
stable angina. 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
17
Revascularization 
 
CABG versus medical therapy 
Evidence from randomized clinical trials has demonstrated that coronary artery 
bypass grafts (CABG) improves mortality when compared to medical therapy for 
patients with significant left main disease, three vessel disease with left 
ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of less than 50%, or multi-vessel disease 
with involvement of the proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD).  
Although these trials were performed in an era prior to the availability of 
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) and the routine use of aspirin, β-
blockers, and lipid lowering therapy, these surgical indications remain currently 
valid. 
 
CABG versus PCI 
PCI may be considered in patients with multi-vessel CAD (including the proximal 
LAD), who have anatomy suitable for catheter-based technique, do not have 
diabetes, and have normal left ventricular function.  CABG or PCI may be 
considered in appropriate patients with single or multi-vessel CAD who have not 
been treated successfully by medical therapy and can undergo revascularization 
with acceptable risk. 
 
PCI versus medical therapy 
Many trials illustrate that low-risk patients with chronic stable angina pectoris and 
normal left ventricular function can be treated safely with medical therapy.  
Because of the risk of procedure-related complications, clinicians must carefully 
balance this excess hazard with the need for greater symptomatic improvement 
when selecting patients for PCI. 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
18
 
Antiplatelet agents 
 
 
Aspirin (75-150 mg) exerts its antithrombotic effect by inhibiting cyclo-
oxygenase and synthesis of platelet thromboxane A2. It is effective in preventing 
first heart attacks, improving mortality in acute coronary syndromes, and reducing 
adverse cardiovascular events in patients with stable angina pectoris.  Aspirin 
should therefore be considered as first line therapy in all patients with chronic 
ischaemic heart disease.  In patients with absolute aspirin contraindications 
alternative antiplatelet regimes such as dipyridamole (Persantine), ticlopidine 
(Ticlid), glycoprotein 11b/111a receptor antagonists may be considered, although 
the clinical data supporting their use in angina pectoris is less established. 
 
 
Lipid lowering therapy 
 
 
Of the classes of antihyperlipidemic drugs, the hydroxy-methylglutanyl coenzyme 
A reductase inhibitors or statins are the most potent agents available in lowering 
total and low density lipoprotein (LDL) and atherogenic cholesterol and are the 
only lipid-lowering agents shown to improve overall mortality in clinical trials.  
Furthermore, statins also exhibit anti-inflammatory properties, which may 
positively modify the artherosclerotic process. 
 
 
Therefore, statins should be considered in all patients with established CAD and 
LDL cholesterol ≥ 130 mg/dL, targeting the on-therapy LDL cholesterol to less 
than 100 mg/dL.  In general, modification of diet and exercise are less effective 
than statins in achieving the target levels of LDL cholesterol; thus, lipid lowering 
pharmacotherapy is usually required in patients with angina and should be 
considered as first-line therapy in disease modification. 
 
 
A high density lipoprotein (HDL), antiatherogenic cholesterol level of less than 
35 mg/dL is an independent risk factor for adverse cardiovascular events.  
Hygienic measures such as weight loss, exercise, alcohol consumption, diabetes 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
19
control, and smoking cessation may provide modest increases in HDL cholesterol.  
Recently, a randomized trial comparing the fibrate gemfibrozil to placebo 
demonstrated reduced cardiovascular mortality in patients with CAD and an 
isolated HDL cholesterol of less than 35 mg/dL. 
 
 
5.4.2 Education and Risk Factor Reduction 
 
 
Identification and treatment of coronary disease risk factors in patients with 
angina is necessary for optimal secondary prevention of chronic ischaemic heart 
disease.  Established and modifiable coronary disease risk factors, such as 
cigarette smoking, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and hyperlipidemia, are 
common in patients with chronic ischaemic heart disease.  These risk factors are 
readily amenable to modification, and their treatment can affect clinical outcome 
favourably. 
 
 
Studies show that the risk of death from CAD is inversely proportional to 
education.  It is therefore important for the physician to assess the patient’s 
baseline understanding of his or her condition and to appropriately educate the 
patient and his or her family on the pathology and pathophysiology of the disease, 
prognosis of condition, and treatment and risk factor reduction options. 
 
 
Obesity 
 
 
Obesity is a common condition associated with an increased risk for coronary 
artery disease and mortality.  Obesity is also associated  with and contributes to 
other coronary risk factors, including high blood pressure, glucose intolerance, 
low levels of HDL cholesterol, and elevated triglycerides.  Thus, much of the 
increased CAD risk associated with obesity is mediated by these factors.  Weight 
reduction in obese patients with coronary disease can likely reduce the risk of 
future events because weight reduction will reduce other modifiable risk factors 
and reduce the increased myocardial oxygen demand imposed by obesity.  Weight 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
20
reduction is therefore recommended in all obese patients with ischaemic heart 
disease.  Strategies to improve weight reduction include: 
 
a. 
lowering total caloric intake,  
b. 
eating foods low in cholesterol and saturated fat and high in fibre and 
unsaturated fat, and  
c. 
exercise training. 
 
 
Exercise 
  
 
Exercise training improves blood pressure, glucose control, lipid profile, exercise 
endurance, and objective measures of ischaemia.  In addition, exercise training 
may lead to changes in weight and a sense of well-being.  For these reasons, a 
regular exercise program should be part of a multifactorial intervention program 
in patients with stable chronic ischaemic heart disease. 
 
5.5 
FOLLOW-UP 
 
 
Patients who are successfully treated for chronic ischaemic heart disease should 
have follow-up evaluation every 4 to 12 months.  A more precise interval cannot 
be recommended because many factors influence the length of follow-up period.  
Five questions must be answered regularly during the follow-up evaluation: 
 
(1) 
Has the patient decreased the level of physical activity? 
(2) 
Have the patient’s anginal symptoms increased in frequency and become 
more severe since the last visit? 
(3) 
How well is the patient tolerating therapy? 
(4) 
How successful has the patient been in reducing modifiable risk factors 
and improving knowledge about ischaemic heart disease? 
(5) 
Has the patient developed any new comorbid illnesses or has the severity 
or treatment of known comorbid illnesses worsened the patient’s angina? 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
21
 
Patients who cannot reliably identify and report changes in their status or who 
need more support with their treatment or risk factor reduction should be seen 
more frequently. 
 
5.6 
INDICATIONS FOR REFERRAL TO CARDIOLOGIST 
 
 
In general, most patients with chronic stable angina initially present to their  
primary care physician.  The preliminary diagnosis, risk stratification, medical 
management, risk factor modification, and patient education are performed under 
direction of the primary care physician.  Patients with worsening anginal 
symptoms (Canadian Cardiovascular Society Angina Class III or IV) or 
presenting with any acute coronary syndrome should be referred to a cardiologist.  
Furthermore, patients with an increased risk for adverse cardiac events, left 
ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) ≤ 35%, high-risk exercise treadmill score, 
multiple large ischaemic zones on stress imaging, successfully resuscitated from 
sudden cardiac death, sustained ventricular tachycardia, significant angina 
pectoris symptoms despite medical treatment should be considered for coronary 
angiography and evaluated by a cardiology specialist.  Those patients who are co-
managed by their primary care physician and cardiologist may alternate follow-up 
evaluations, provided that communication among physicians is excellent and all 
appropriate issues are addressed at each visit. 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
22
5.7 
KEY POINTS 
 
• 
Angina pectoris is the most common initial manifestation of chronic ischaemic heart 
disease. 
• 
A mismatch between coronary blood flow and myocardial oxygen demand results in 
myocardial ischaemia. 
• 
Medical treatment of patients with chronic ischaemic heart disease should include: 
aspirin and anti-anginals, β-blocker and blood pressure control, cholesterol lowering 
and cigarette cessation, dietary modification and diabetes assessment, and exercise 
and education. 
• 
Coronary angiography should be considered in patients with chronic angina and any 
of the following: 
1. Left ventricular ejection fraction less than 35% 
2. High risk exercise treadmill score 
3. Multiple large ischaemic zones on stress imaging (especially if anterior 
distribution),  
4. Successful resuscitation from sudden cardiac death,  
5. Sustained ventricular tachycardia, and 
6. Significant angina pectoris despite medical treatment. 
• 
Coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) should be considered in patients with chronic 
angina and any of the following: 
1. Significant left main disease, 
2. Three vessel coronary artery disease (CAD) and depressed left ventricular 
functions, and 
3. Multi-vessel CAD that includes the proximal segment of the left anterior 
descending (LAD). 
• 
Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) may be considered in patients who have 
multi-vessel CAD (including the proximal LAD), have anatomy suitable for catheter-
based technique, do not have diabetes, and have normal left ventricular function. 
• 
Coronary revascularization with either PCI or CABG may be considered in 
appropriate patients with single or multi-vessel CAD who have failed medical 
management of chronic angina pectoris. 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
23
6. 
ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROMES 
 
Acute coronary syndromes share a common pathophysiology - rupture of a 
vulnerable plaque with subsequent activation of dynamic inflammatory, 
thrombotic and ischaemic cascades. 
 
Acute coronary syndromes (ACS) may be divided into two broad categories: 
 
1. 
non-ST elevation ACS: 
unstable angina (UA)  
non-ST elevation MI and  
2. 
ST elevation myocardial infarction (MI). 
 
Acute non ST elevation coronary  syndrome without injury (ie, with negative  
serial enzyme measurements) is  termed unstable angina (UA). 
 
Acute non ST elevation coronary syndrome with cell injury, demonstrated by 
serial measurements of cardiac  enzymes is termed non-ST elevation MI. 
 
6.2 
UNSTABLE ANGINA AND NON ST ELEVATION ACUTE MYOCARDIAL 
INFARCTION 
 
6.1.1 Clinical presentation 
 
Non ST elevation  acute coronary syndrome  (unstable angina and non-ST 
elevation myocardial infarction) is defined as a change in the status of a patient’s 
angina. It includes the following presentations: (a) new-onset angina, (b) angina 
of increasing severity, frequency, duration and lesser or slower response to 
rest and/or sublingual nitrates, (c) angina occuring at rest for the first time 
and (d) post infarction angina. 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
24
The term unstable angina implies a more serious clinical situation than chronic 
stable angina since it may be an immediate precursor of myocardial infarction.  
 
6.1.2  History, Examination and Investigations 
 
History 
 
A carefully obtained history is essential in establishing the diagnosis. 
 
A non-ST elevation ACS should be suspected in any patient who presents with 
new or worsening chest discomfort that may be consistent with angina. History 
should focus on: risk factors for coronary artery disease, pre-existing diagnosis of 
CAD and/or stress-testing, and the nature of the chest discomfort. 
 
Important elements include location, quality, radiation, duration, associated 
symptoms, and factors that trigger, worsen, or relieve the pain. 
 
The diagnosis is easier in patients with preexisting stable effort angina, acquiring 
new features during some recent time-usually 1 to 4 weeks. 
 
In patients without prior (more than 4 weeks) history of angina (de novo angina) 
history may be less easy though. 
 
 
Some patients may not present with chest pain, but rather with arm or jaw pain, 
epigastric discomfort, dyspnoea, or nausea. 
 
Questions should also be directed toward establishing potential non-ischaemic 
sources of pain which may mimic an acute coronary syndrome  . 
 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
25
Physical Examination 
 
Physical examination during acute coronary syndromes may be relatively 
unremarkable. The patient may appear anxious or diaphoretic (cold sweats). 
 
Tachycardia or bradycardia, as well as extremes of blood pressure, may be 
present, but vital signs are often normal. 
 
Heart failure or valvular regurgitation are unusual acute consequences of non-ST 
elevation ACS, but may be concurrently present in patients with underlying 
cardiac disease. 
 
Signs of peripheral vascular disease, such as carotid bruits or diminished 
extremity pulses, should increase the suspicion of atherosclerotic coronary 
disease.  
 
Physical examination is perhaps most useful to diagnose non-ischaemic causes 
of pain, such as costochondritis, pneumonia, obstructive pulmonary disease, 
pericarditis, aortic dissection, upper gastrointestinal disease etc. 
 
Laboratory Testing 
 
Complete blood count, electrolytes, renal function tests, and chest x-ray are useful 
to diagnose other causes of symptoms and to evaluate for concurrent medical 
conditions, such as renal insufficiency. Clotting times should be obtained to 
exclude bleeding diatheses prior to potential initiation of antithrombotic therapies. 
.  
The cornerstones of diagnostic testing, however, are ECG analysis and 
measurements of serum cardiac markers. 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
26
ECG analysis 
 
A baseline ECG, preferably during the chest pain, is essential in any risk 
stratification for the purpose of management. 
 
Non ST elevation acute coronary syndromes are subdivided into 
1. those without ECG changes, i.e a normal ECG (about 40% of patients)   
2. those whose ECG shows ischemic changes (biphasic or inverted T waves, ST-
depression, and/or transient ST elevation – 60%)  
 
The following ECG abnormalities are predictive of an incrementally higher risk: 
transient T wave inversion, transient ST elevation, ST depression, and  transient 
both ST elevation and depression. 
 
Transient or dynamic ECG changes are  suggestive of ischaemia, and therefore 
the need for serial ECGs in the first few hours after presentation especially when 
pain persists, when pain recurs after initial improvement, or when pain subsides 
and initial ECG abnormalities disappear..  
 
Development of persistent ST elevation or left bundle branch block should 
prompt urgent evaluation for thrombolytics or percutaneous intervention. 
 
Serum cardiac markers 
 
Various serum markers have demonstrated utility as markers of myocardial injury 
(infarction), including serum creatine kinase (CK)-MB and troponin I or T.  
 
One main advantage of using both markers is their different time course: while 
either may detect early injury, CK-MB values typically return to normal by 1 to 2 
days, while troponin levels usually remain elevated for 5 to 14 days.When both 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
27
markers are measured in the first 24 hours after presentation, situations arise in 
which one serum marker is normal while the other is mildly elevated. 
 
Serum myoglobin is sometimes useful as an initial screen in doubtful cases 
because of its higher early sensitivity (2 hours),  
 
Initial Risk Stratification 
One important goal of the initial evaluation is identification of high risk patients, 
those with an increased risk of death or MI in the first 30 days. 
 
Various clinical features are predictive of this higher risk.(Table 4). 
 
Table 4:  Features  predictive of increased risk  in non-ST elevation ACS 
 
History 
Older age 
Diabetes mellitus 
Known coronary artery disease 
Postinfarction angina 
Physical examination 
Signs of depressed left ventricular function 
Hypotension 
ECG changes 
ST depression (and/or transient  elevation) 
Laboratory: elevated CK-MB or troponin 
Clinical course 
Need for intravenous  nitroglycerin 
Recurrent or refractory ischaemia 
Gallbladder, liver, gastric, or  pancreatic disease 
 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
28
Identification of patients with these features should lead to strong consideration 
for institution of more intensive antithrombotic therapy  
 
 
6.1.3 Differential Diagnosis 
 
The diagnosis of non-ST  elevation ACS should be  suspected in any patient who  
presents with new or worsening  ischaemic chest pain consistent  with angina, 
with ECG  abnormalities suggestive of  ischaemia but without ST  elevation. 
 
Table 5: Non-ischaemic  causes of chest discomfort 
  
Costochondritis 
 
 
Muscle strain 
  
Gastroesophageal reflux 
 
Oesophageal rupture 
  
Aortic dissection 
 
 
Pericarditis 
  
Congestive heart failure 
 
Arrhythmias 
  
Pulmonary embolism  
 
Pneumothorax 
  
Pneumonia 
 
 
 
Pleurisy 
  
Obstructive always disease 
 
Anxiety 
 
 
However, as noted  previously, in many cases the  initial ECG may be mildly 
abnormal or even normal. In  these cases, the diagnosis rests  on the clinical 
history of chest  discomfort of a new or more  severe nature, occurring more 
frequently, at lower levels of  activity, or at rest. It is this group  of patients, 
wherein typical  ischaemic ECG changes are  absent, that presents perhaps the 
greatest diagnostic and  management challenge to primary  care providers, 
emergency room  personnel, and cardiologists  alike. 
 
In general the clinician  should ask himself the following  question: Given the 
clinical  history of new or changing chest discomfort, combined with the  
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
29
physical examination, ECG, and  laboratory findings, do I believe  that there 
may have been acute  plaque rupture with thrombus  formation? 
 
If the answer is no,  then, although hospitalization and  observation of the patient 
might still be warranted, interventions  such as treatment with heparin, 
intravenous nitrates , glycoprotein receptor inhibitors,  and cardiac catheterization 
may  not be indicated. 
 
 
6.1.4 Management 
 
Patients with low risk unstable angina may be managed as outpatients with early 
follow-up evaluations. 
 
Patients with high risk unstable angina (see table 4 above) require hospitalisation 
with imposition of bed rest and sedation in an ECG-monitored environment. 
Initial medical management of High Risk Unstable Angina and non Q-wave MI 
 
Hospitalisation, preferably in a coronary care setting 
Bed rest (24 – 48 hrs) 
Sedation as needed 
Correction of precipitating conditions such as HBP, arrhythmias, anaemia, 
hypoxaemia 
Goals of treatment: 
Relieve ischaemic symptoms with antianginal drugs at therapeutic dosage 
Inhibit thrombosis 
 
 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
30
 
Drug treatment 
A. 
Intravenous nitroglycerin (GTN, ISDN)- for 24 hrs. If asymptomatic after 24 hrs - 
oral long acting nitrates 
B. 
Beta blockers (if not contraindicated)  
C. 
Calcium antagonists (verapamil, diltiazem) if beta-blockers contraindicated 
N.B. Nifedipine only if associated with β-blockers 
D. 
Narcotic analgesics for pain refractory to antianginal drugs 
E. 
Heparin- bolus of 70-80 units/kg + infusion of 15-18 units/kg/hour. 
KPTT should be checked every 6 hrs until therapeutic level of 1.5 – 2.0 (50-70 
sec) 
 
Low molecular weight heparin (enoxaparin) –  1 mg/kg bd for 48 hours (or more if 
angioplasty contemplated) 
 
F. 
Aspirin 150-300 mg od 
Ticlopidine if aspirin contra-indicated  - 250 mg bd 
Glycoprotein 11b- 111a receptor inhibitors (Reopro, Integrelin) 
 
G. Lipid lowering therapy 
 
 
Unless contraindicated, all patients with suspected ACS should be given aspirin 
(150–300 mg orally). 
 
If pain is present, nitroglycerin tablets should be given sublingually, with 
subsequent further sublingual, transdermal, or intravenous doses as necessary. 
 
If pain is not completely relieved with nitrates, intravenous opiates such as 
morphine sulphate should be considered. 
 
If oesophageal or gastric pain is suspected, an oral antacid can be given as well. 
Heart rate, blood pressure, and rhythm should be monitored closely. 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
31
If there is significant hypertension (e.g., blood pressure > 170/100 mmHg), 
tachycardia, persistent chest pain, or ischaemic ECG changes, intravenous beta-
blockers should be administered in the absence of contraindications.  
 
Oral beta-blockade (eg., atenolol 25–50 mg once daily) should be given to all 
patients without contraindications, even when vital signs are normal. 
 
If the clinical suspicion of ACS is quite low, then the above treatment combined 
with observation in a monitored setting may be adequate. 
 
For patients at higher risk, and for all patients with persistent pain, recurrent pain, 
or ECG changes, further antithrombotic therapy is indicated, consisting of heparin 
with or without a glycoprotein receptor inhibitor . 
 
Antithrombotic and Anticoagulant Therapy 
 
The mainstays of antithrombotic and anticoagulant therapy have been aspirin and 
unfractionated heparin. Two newer classes of agents, however, show substantial 
benefit in the treatment of non-ST elevation ACS. These are (a) low molecular 
weight heparins and (b) glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor inhibitor 
 
Low molecular weight heparins 
 
Treatment with the low molecular weight enoxaparin (Lovenox) reduces 
significantly the combined endpoint of death, myocardial infarction, and recurrent 
angina or urgent revascularization, compared with unfractionated heparin. 
 
Dosing is 1 mg/kg subcutaneously twice daily, started on admission and typically 
continued until in-hospital risk stratification, revascularization, or hospital 
discharge.  
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
32
Practical advantages of this therapy are simplified dosing and administration, 
absence of coagulation profile monitoring, and potential cost savings. 
 
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor antagonists 
 
Platelet glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa receptors represent the final common pathway 
for platelet aggregation, via fibrin binding and cross-linking of the GP IIb/IIIa 
receptor. Antibody fragment (abciximab) and peptide (eptifibatide, tirofiban) 
antagonists to the GP IIb/IIIa receptor have been developed, which demonstrate 
powerful in vitro and in vivo inhibition of platelet aggregation. 
 
Use of GP IIb/IIIa antagonists, therefore, should be considered in addition to 
aspirin and heparin in any individual suspected of having a non-ST elevation 
ACS, especially if high-risk features are present, such as elevated serum enzymes, 
persistent chest pain, or ST depression . In this setting, lower doses of intravenous 
heparin are indicated, with goal of prothrombin time 1.5 to 2 times control. 
Contraindications due to bleeding risk are similar to those for thrombolytics. The 
cost of those drugs is still, however, very prohibitive.  
 
In-hospital risk stratification 
 
If chest pain persists or recurs on the medical and antithrombotic therapies 
described, in association with high clinical suspicion or objective evidence of 
ischemia such as positive serum markers or ECG changes, then cardiac 
catheterization is typically indicated. 
 
However, while this may occur in a significant proportion of patients, many 
patients with non-ST elevation ACS can be made pain-free with nitrates, β-
blockers, opiates, and antithrombotic therapy.  
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
33
Additionally, others may have recurrent chest pain, but with low clinical 
suspicion and no objective evidence of ischemia. In these groups of patients, in-
hospital risk stratification is indicated after an initial period of medical 
stabilization (typically 18–48 hours). 
 
Revascularization 
 
If cardiac catheterization is performed, either due to refractory ischaemia or as 
part of risk-stratification as described above, then revascularization should be 
considered if suitable coronary anatomy is present.  
 
The choice of percutaneous v/s surgical revascularization depends on both the 
coronary anatomy and individual patient characteristics and preferences. 
 
All patients should receive maximal preventive therapy. 
 
6.1.5 Follow-up and Secondary Prevention 
 
Many interventions have shown  utility in the secondary prevention  of ACS, 
including control of  cardiac risk factors such as  smoking, hypertension, 
hyperlipidemia, and diabetes,  regular use of aspirin, use of  beta-blockers and 
angiotensin-converting-enzyme  inhibitors in selected patients,  and adherence to 
cardioprotective diets containing  n-3-omega fatty acids,  monounsaturated fats, 
and  antioxidants . 
 
All of these interventions act by reducing the inflammatory and  thrombotic 
milieu of the  atherosclerotic vessel. 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
34
6.1.6 Indications for referral to Cardiologist 
 
Patients with worsening anginal symptoms or presenting with any acute coronary 
syndrome should be referred to a cardiologist. 
 
Those patients who are co-managed by their primary care physicians and 
cardiologist may alternate follow-up evaluations, provided that communication 
among physicians is excellent and all appropriate issues are addressed at each 
visit. 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
35
6.2 
ST elevation acute myocardial infarction 
 
6.2.1 Clinical presentation 
 
ST elevation myocardial infarction occurs when myocardial oxygen supply is 
abruptly stopped by prolonged and totally occlusive coronary thrombosis leading 
to necrosis of the myocardial tissue.   
 
Acute myocardial infarction is a medical emergency in which the mortality is 
greatest within the first 2 hours after the onset of symptoms. Mortality from acute 
myocardial infarction can be significantly reduced by rapid transport to a 
coronary care setting, institution of prompt thrombolytic or mechanical 
(angioplasty) 
reperfusion, 
treatment 
of 
ventricular 
arrhythmias 
and 
haemodynamic complications. 
  
 
History 
 
Diagnosis 
 
The diagnosis of acute  myocardial infarction requires the presence of  at least 2 
of the following criteria (1) clinical symptoms suggestive of an acute MI 
(2)ECG findings consistent with ischaemia or necrosis and (3) elevated 
biochemical markers.  
 
The  decision to institute thrombolytic therapy usually is based on clinical 
findings and ECG, because laboratory confirmation of the  clinical diagnosis of 
acute MI requires several hours. 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
36
History 
 
The cardinal characteristics of chest pain of acute myocardial infarction are: 
a. localisation and to a lesser  extent - radiation 
b. duration of continuous ischaemic pain 
c. response to oral nitrates 
 
Prodromal symptoms of unstable angina such as de novo angina pectoris 
during or after exercise or even at rest with increasing frequency are often 
reported (unstable angina) if properly queried. 
 
The pain of myocardial infarction is usually described as a pressure,  
compression, constriction, squeezing, boring, or burning in the chest, 
characteristically radiating to the left arm,  but also sometimes involving the neck, 
jaw, epigastrium, right arm, or back, lasting continuously for over 30 minutes, not 
relieved by rest or nitroglycerin administration, and often accompanied by 
anxiety, apprehension, restlessness, hypotension, nausea, paleness and sweating. 
 
Almost 25% of patients with acute myocardial infarctions may be completely 
asymptomatic at the  onset of coronary occlusion (“silent infarcts”). 
 
In the elderly or patients with diabetes, chest pain might be less severe and other 
symptoms  such as syncope, faintness, or dyspnea may be present. 
 
The acute symptoms of MI are frequently associated with stress such as anger or 
upsetting life events, or occasionally excessive physical exertion . 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
37
6.2.2 Examination and Investigations 
 
1. 
Physical Examination 
 
The rapid, risk-stratification orientated physical examination should be directed 
towards identification of: 
1. haemodynamic instability, and 
2. pulmonary congestion 
 
New systolic murmurs are particularly important, suggesting the presence of 
ischaemic mitral regurgitation (due to papillary muscle dysfunction or more 
dramatically due to papillary muscle rupture) or an acquired ventricular septal 
defect (due to rupture of the infarcted area of the septum) 
 
There is no diagnostic physical sign of acute MI. The clinical appearance is 
variable (from the healthy-looking athlete carrying his own suitcase to the 
somnolent patient in  cardiogenic shock). However, to detect complications of 
acute MI, physical examination—in particular, auscultation of the lungs and the 
heart—should be done repeatedly every day in all patients. 
 
 
2. 
Electrocardiographic Findings 
 
The electrocardiogram serves as the hallmark for diagnosis of acute MI because 
characteristic ST, T, and Q-wave changes are detectable  in most of the patients. 
 
In the early stage of acute coronary occlusion (phase 1 or hyperacute phase) giant 
positive T waves appear  with taller than normal R waves . 
 
In phase 2 (acute phase, more commonly seen at hospital admission), ST-segment 
elevation is evident with a decrease in amplitude of the R wave, followed by 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
38
pathologic Q-wave development that lasts 0.04 seconds or  more and reaches 25% 
of the amplitude of the R wave (pathologic Q- wave, phase 3, when cell necrosis 
occurs over hours to days).  
 
Over time, the ST segment returns to normal with T wave inversion (terminal 
negative T wave); the R wave may be lost as a result of  transmural necrosis and 
may be replaced by a QS wave (phase 4, chronic phase). The Q wave or QS wave 
persists, whereas the T  wave may return to positive. 
 
ST-wave elevation may persist in cases of left ventricular dyskinesis or aneurysm. 
The electrocardiographic leads not representing the infarcted area may show 
inverse, reciprocal ST-segment alterations.  
 
A new left bundle branch block  may be present and, if it persists, usually 
indicates large anterior wall infarction. 
 
The diagnosis of acute infarction in patients with acute chest pain who present 
with left  bundle branch block is highly probable when there is ST-segment 
elevation of 1 mm or more concordant with the QRS complex, ST-segment 
depression of 1 mm or  more in lead V1, V2, or V3, and ST-segment elevation of 
5 mm or more discordant to the QRS complex.   When possible, the current ECG 
tracing should be compared with previous records.  
 
Determination of myocardial infarct localization  according to ECG leads is listed 
in Table 5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
39
Table 5: Location of myocardial infarction according to electrocardiographic leads 
and involved coronary artery 
  
ST-segment elevation in 
Ventricular location Coronary artery involved 
 
V1 through V3 
 
Anteroseptal  
Proximal LAD, septal  
perforators 
V2 through V4 
 
Anteroapical  
LAD, diagonal branches 
I, aVL, V6 
 
 
Lateral  
 
LAD, diagonal branch, or  
circumflex 
I, aVL  
 
 
High lateral 
 
1st diagonal branch or  
circumflex 
I, aVL, V3 through V6 
Anterolateral  
Mid LAD or circumflex 
I, aVL, V1 through V6 
Extensive anterior 
Proximal LAD 
II, III, aVF 
 
 
Inferior 
 
RCA or circumflex, distal LAD 
V1 through V2 
 
Posterior 
 
Posterior descending of 
(ST depression) 
 
 
 
 
RCA, circumflex 
II, III, aVF, 
 
 
Inferolateral  
RCA or circumflex 
V5 through V6 
V1, V3R, V4R 
 
Right ventricular 
RCA 
 
(LAD—left anterior descending RCA—right coronary artery.) 
 
3. 
Cardiac enzymes 
 
After myocardial injury and cell death, cellular enzymes are released into the 
bloodstream. The typical time course of enzyme alterations  that occur can help to 
determine the phase of MI. 
 
The most commonly used tests are creatinine kinase (CK), CK-MB, and the very 
specific troponins (troponin I or T).  
 
For clinical use, it is recommended that cardiac troponin T be measured to 
distinguish between cardiac and other sources of chest pain. In case of elevated 
troponin, follow-up measurements of CK  are sufficient to determine the course of 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
40
myocardial infarction. If chest pain is recurrent, intermittent analyses of CK-MB 
or troponin T  are recommended for detection of  reinfarction.  
 
4. 
Imaging Techniques 
 
Global ventricular function and mechanical and hemodynamic complications such 
as papillary muscle rupture, septal  rupture, pericardial effusion, mitral 
regurgitation, intraventricular thrombi, and their follow-up all can be assessed 
accurately by  echocardiography.  
 
6.2.3 Differential diagnosis 
 
Although in the majority of cases the diagnosis of ST elevation acute MI is 
straightforward, a rapid but well thought differential diagnosis is essential. It is 
mandatory that those diseases in which thrombolysis is not only of no use but may 
even be contraindicated be excluded. 
 
These are: pericarditis, early repolarisation on ECG, acute aortic dissection, 
pneumothorax, ventricular aneurysms, Prinzmetal’s angina, left ventricular strain 
pattern, left bundle branch block, hyperkalaemia, cerebro-vascular accident etc.  
 
6.2.4 Management 
 
Acute Management Strategies include: 
1. Thrombolysis 
2. Platelet antiaggregants 
3. Anticoagulants 
4. Maintenance of oxygen balance 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
41
Because acute MI always represents a life-threatening event, the patient with 
suspected acute myocardial infarction should be hospitalized  immediately to 
minimize delay in appropriate therapy. 
 
Therapy for acute  MI consists of the following six steps:1) relief of pain, 2) relief 
of anxiety and restlessness, and sedation, 3) reperfusion, 4)  anticoagulation, 
5)therapy for complications, 6) secondary prevention. 
 
For steps 1 and 2, repeated administration of intravenous morphine (2 to 10 mg or 
more), is the treatment of choice, which can be combined with antiemetics to 
reduce side  effects. 
 
Initial Management in ALL patients  
(thrombolysis or not) 
 
• General measures: IV line, blood samples for CE, electrolytes, FBC, lipid 
profile 
• Monitoring for cardiac rhythm, vital signs. 
• If no ST elevation – repeat ECG in 1 hour (or earlier) if ongoing chest 
discomfort 
• Pain: adequate analgesia- Morphia IV 2-4 mg to be repeated in 10 min 
interval until pain is under control (or side effects +) 
• Nausea/vomiting – Primperan IV 
• Hypotension – adequate volume expansion 
• GTN s/l every 5 min (if no C/I), then infusion 
• Oxygen 2-4 l/min 
• Aspirin per os or Aspegic IV 
• Heparin - IV bolus 5000 u/kg, then 1000u/h or enoxaparin 1 mg/kg bd sk 
• Beta blockers- Atenolol 5-10 mg IV (if no C/I- bradycardia, hypotension, 
LVF, HB, COPD, severe peripheral vascular diseases) 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
42
Once the patient arrives at the  hospital, initial evaluation of the patient’s history, 
coronary risk factors, physical signs, 12-lead ECG tracing, possible 
contraindications for  reperfusion therapy, and steps for treatment should be 
initiated within 20 to 30 minutes (“door-to-needle time”). The presence of a 
special  thrombolysis nurse might reduce the delay in instituting reperfusion 
therapy for patients with acute MI. 
 
In the emergency ward the  patient should immediately receive aspirin in 
chewable form, oxygen by nasal prongs or masks (blood gases may be checked, 
especially in patients  with chronic pulmonary diseases), and sublingual nitrates 
(unless systolic arterial pressure is less than 90 mmHg or heart rate is less than 50 
or greater than 100 beats per minute). 
 
The patient should be monitored and have bed rest for 12 to 24 hours as life-
threatening arrhythmias, reinfarction, mechanical complications, and death occur 
most frequently within the first 24  hours after acute MI.  
 
Reperfusion Therapy 
 
The main goal in the treatment of patients with acute MI is to reduce the extent of 
irreversible myocardial tissue damage and necrosis.  
 
Fibrinolytic therapy should be initiated  as early as possible, preferably within the  
first 3 hours after onset of persistent chest pain, but some benefit may still be 
derived if administered up to even 12 hours (if pain persists with ST elevation).  
 
Eligibility for thrombolytic therapy 
 
• Chest pain of >30 min and < 12 hrs  
• ST segment elevation of > 1.0 mV in two continuous ECG leads indicative of 
AMI 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
43
• New LBBB on ECG 
 
Because fibrinolytic agents increase the risk of hemorrhage, including 
intracerebral hemorrhage, several cautions and contraindications must  be 
considered before treatment can be initiated. These are: 
 
A. Absolute contraindications: 
• Active internal bleeding 
• Suspected aortic dissection 
• Known intracranial neoplasm 
• History of any haemorragic CVA ever  
• Or other cerebrovascular event during the past 1 year 
 
B. Relative contraindications: 
• Severe hypertension on presentation (BP  > 180/110 mm.Hg.) 
• History of chronic severe hypertension 
• History of prior CVA or other intracranial pathology 
• Recent trauma (< 2 weeks) or major surgery (< 3 weeks) 
• Prolonged or traumatic CPR (> 10 min) 
• Non-compressible vascular punctures 
• Recent internal bleeding (< 2-45 weeks) 
• Known bleeding diathesis or current INR > 2-3 
• For streptokinase- prior exposure or known allergy 
 
Primary Percutaneous Coronary Intervention 
 
Primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) can serve as an alternative to 
thrombolysis only if  performed in a timely fashion by individuals skilled in the 
procedure and supported by experienced personnel in high-volume centers . 
Indications include patients with contraindications to thrombolysis, patients at risk 
for bleeding, and patients with cardiogenic  shock 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
44
 
Adjunctive Therapy 
Platelet antiaggregants. 
Early adjunctive therapy with thrombolysis consists of aspirin, which quickly 
prevents thromboxane A2 production in platelets and  prostacyclin in endothelial 
cells. Aspirin should be administered at the time of admission to the emergency 
ward at a dose of 150 to 300 mg, preferably in a chewable form because of its  
faster absorption, followed by a daily administration indefinitely thereafter.  
 
In case of true aspirin allergy, dipyridamole or  ticlopidine may be used. 
 
Heparin (which forms a complex with antithrombin III, thus inactivating 
thrombin) is recommended in patients with large or  anterior MI, known left 
ventricular thrombus, or previous embolic events. In patients not treated with 
thrombolytic therapy or with  nonselected thrombolytics (streptokinase, 
anistreplase, urokinase), and in patients without increased risk for systemic 
emboli, subcutaneous  administration of 7500 U (or 1 mg/kg of enoxaparin) twice 
daily may be administered . Prolonged intravenous heparin therapy has not been 
shown to  decrease the rate of reocclusion. 
 
β-Adrenergic blockers are known to reduce myocardial oxygen consumption, as 
well as acute and long-term mortality and morbidity, and  should be administered 
intravenously as early as possible (on day 1 within 12 hours) followed by oral 
therapy if contraindications are  excluded. Furthermore, β-blockers may reduce 
infarct size and the incidence of ventricular fibrillation and reinfarction.  
 
ACE inhibitors should be initiated on day 1 within hours  of hospitalization in 
patients with evolving acute MI with ST-segment elevation or left bundle branch 
block and continued indefinitely in  case of impaired left ventricular function (the 
lower the ejection fraction, the greater the benefit).  
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
45
Intravenous nitroglycerin is recommended during the first 12-24 hours and 
beyond this time frame in patients with recurrent angina, large infarction, and 
pulmonary  congestion.  
 
Calcium antagonists, predominantly short-acting nifedipine, may be harmful and 
should be avoided in patients with acute MI. If  β-blockers are ineffective, 
verapamil or diltiazem might be used in patients with ischaemia or tachycardia in 
the absence of left ventricular  dysfunction or AV block . 
 
Magnesium administration is recommended only to correct  documented 
magnesium deficits, especially in patients receiving diuretics, in the case of 
torsades de pointes with a prolonged QT interval,  and in high-risk patients not 
receiving reperfusion therapy.  
 
Intensive insulin-glucose administration (24h) during acute MI reduces long-
term mortality in patients with diabetes and might be considered in this cohort . 
 
Complications of Acute Myocardial Infarction 
Arrhythmias 
The incidence of arrhythmias may be as high as 100% in patients with acute MI, 
and manifests predominantly as premature ventricular  beats. 
 
The most serious and life-threatening arrhythmias are ventricular fibrillation and 
sustained polymorphic ventricular tachycardia  requiring early electrical 
defibrillation (200 J), which is repeated if unsuccessful (up to 360 J). 
Monomorphic ventricular tachycardia not  associated with angina or acute heart 
failure may be treated with the antiarrhythmic agents lidocaine (1 to 1.5 mg/kg as 
a bolus, followed  by 2 to 4 mg/min intravenously), procainamide, amiodarone, or 
synchronized electrical cardioversion.  
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
46
For bradyarrhythmia and  heart block, either intravenous atropine or temporary 
transvenous (or, in some cases, transcutaneous) pacing is recommended. 
Indications  for pacing are symptomatic bradycardia (less than 50 beats per 
minute) with symptoms of hypotension not responding to atropine;  asystole; 
bilateral bundle branch block; newly developed or indeterminate bifascicular 
block with first-degree AV block; second-degree  symptomatic or Mobitz type II 
AV block, advanced (complete) AV-block; and incessant ventricular tachycardia, 
which requires atrial or  ventricular overdrive pacing. 
 
Atrial fibrillation is often transient and may be associated with heart failure, atrial 
ischemia, or  pericarditis. It should be treated by either electric cardioversion in 
patients with hemodynamic instability or ischemia; or by rapid  digitalization, β-
blockade in patients without contraindications, diltiazem or verapamil, and 
heparin to avoid embolic events. 
 
Hemodynamic and Mechanical Complications 
Congestive heart failure may result from systolic contractile dysfunction due to 
large necrotic areas or to postischaemic contractile wall  motion abnormalities 
(stunned myocardium). Mechanical complications that worsen cardiac function 
include myocardial infarct expansion  and aneurysm formation, ruptured 
ventricle, ventricular septal defect, papillary muscle dysfunction and rupture. The 
primary  symptom is dyspnea, caused by pulmonary congestion and tachycardia. 
Therapy for congestive heart failure should be initiated with  diuretics 
(furosemide, 20 mg intravenously, which may be repeated), nitrates, and oxygen, 
followed by positive inotropic agents  (dobutamine, 2 to 20 µg/kg/min; dopamine 
2 to 10 µg/kg/min intravenously). 
 
In case of severe ventricular dysfunction or cardiogenic  shock, a Swan-Ganz 
pulmonary artery catheter for measurements of cardiac output, pulmonary artery 
capillary wedge pressure pulmonary  and systemic resistances may be placed.  
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
47
6.2.5 Follow-up and Rehabilitation 
 
1. 
Follow-up 
 
In all patients following myocardial infarction without contraindications, long-
term treatment with aspirin and β-adrenergic blockers is recommended . 
 
Recurrent angina should be treated with intravenous nitroglycerin, aspirin, 
heparin,  analgesics, and β-blockers. 
 
ACE inhibitors should be a part of secondary prevention in patients with left  
ventricular dysfunction. 
 
Calcium antagonists are not routinely recommended after infarction but may be 
selectively prescribed in patients with specific indications such as hypertension or 
angina in the presence of preserved left ventricular function.  
 
Carvedilol has  been shown to attenuate ventricular remodeling in patients with 
left ventricular dysfunction after MI, but its long-term effects need  to be 
investigated further. 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
48
 
Table 6: Long-term therapy and secondary prevention after myocardial infarction 
Treatment 
 
Drug therapy  
 
 
Comments 
                                                             
Aspirin 
 
 
 
In all patients without contraindications 
β-Blockers 
 
 
 
In all patients without contraindications 
ACE inhibitors 
 
 
In patients with left ventricular dysfunction 
Dietary therapy 
 
 
Low saturated fats and cholesterol 
Weight-reduction  
and exercise in overweight patients 
Lipid-lowering drugs  
 
If LDL cholesterol > 100 mg/dL,  
HDL cholesterol < 35 mg/dL, triglycerides > 400  
mg/dL 
 
 
2. 
Rehabilitation after MI 
 
Physical activity should be progressively advanced in stable patients. Before 
discharge from the hospital patients should receive verbal and if possible written 
instructions concerning physical activities, medications, diet, and secondary 
preventive measures. 
 
Rehabilitation should concern all facets of patient’s activities: physical, 
psychological, emotional, socioeconomic, life-style changes, risk factors 
management, smoking cessation, education, return to work (if feasible), self-
control, knowledge of limitations etc. 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
49
6.2.6 Post-infarction Evaluation and Secondary Prevention 
 
Coronary angiography and subsequent revascularization, either by PCI or bypass 
grafting, ultimately should be performed in patients  with recurrent angina or 
evidence of large areas of reversible ischemia on stress testing, and might be 
considered selectively in all survivors  of acute MI. 
 
The prognosis after acute myocardial infarction is related to four main factors: 
 
• Extent of left ventricular dysfunction, including degree of left ventricular 
dilation 
• Presence of residual ischemia 
• Degree of electrical instability of the myocardium 
• Progression of coronary atherosclerosis 
 
A risk stratification should be evaluated in each patient. Noninvasive evaluation 
of low-risk patients includes submaximal or  symptom-limited stress ECG at 4 to 
6 days or 10 to 14 days, respectively. For prognostic assessment, after 
mobilization, ie after 1 week, standard exercise testing should be performed to 
assess potential exercise-induced angina or left ventricular dysfunction and 
functional  capacity. Stress ECG should be repeated early after hospital discharge 
and after 4 to 6 weeks. 
 
Patients should be educated about risk factor modification, ie, cessation of 
smoking, necessity of physical exercise, and  effective lifestyle intervention. Diet 
recommendations consist of low saturated fat and cholesterol for  all patients 
following acute MI.  
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
50
6.2.7 Key Points 
 
• 
Acute coronary syndromes share a common  pathophysiology—rupture of a 
vulnerable plaque with subsequent activation of dynamic inflammatory and 
thrombotic cascades. 
 
• 
Initial evaluation, using history, physical examination, electrocardiography, 
and measurement of serum cardiac markers, should be directed toward risk-
stratification of the patient as low, intermediate, or high. 
 
• 
Unless contraindicated, initial treatment should include aspirin, nitrates,               
beta blockade, and unfractionated or low molecular weight heparin, with the 
addition of more intensive antiplatelet therapies for high-risk patients. 
 
• 
After medical stabilisation, strategies of either early cardiac catheterization or 
initial stress testing are appropriate for further risk stratification. 
 
• 
All patients should be discharged on preventive therapies, which are effective 
by reducing the inflammatory and thrombotic milieu of the atherosclerotic 
vessel. 
 
• 
Myocardial infarction is defined as cardiomyocyte necrosis due to lack of 
oxygen supply in relationship to oxygen demand. The underlying cause in 
most cases is rupture of an intracoronary atherosclerotic plaque with 
subsequent platelet aggregation and thrombotic occlusion. 
 
• 
Q wave myocardial infarction is defined as myocardial cell necrosis with 
development and maintenance of Q waves on the electrocardiogram. 
 
• 
The key symptom occurring with acute coronary artery occlusion is severe 
retrosternal chest pain, but symptoms may vary. 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
51
 
• 
Early hospitalization and intensive monitoring in an intensive care or coronary 
care unit is required. 
 
• 
Worldwide mortality of myocardial infarction is 30% to 40%; one third die 
within the first hours. 
 
• 
Treatment of choice is early recanalization by either thrombolytic or 
interventional 
therapy, 
including 
stent 
implantation, 
treatment 
of 
complications, and secondary prevention. 
 
• 
The main prospective goal is public education, early identification of 
myocardial ischemia, and urgent reperfusion therapy. 
                        
• 
The future trend for acute management is the search for the optimal 
reperfusion regimen with the smallest risk. 
 
• 
For chronic management, the trend is toward inhibition of ventricular 
remodeling and long-term improvement of ventricular function. 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
52
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GUIDELINES ON PRIMARY PREVENTION  
OF  
CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE IN MAURITIUS  
AT  
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE LEVEL 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
53
Table of Contents 
 
 
 
1.1 
Introduction and Rationale 
 
1.2 
Definition of Primary Prevention 
 
1.3 
Objectives of Coronary Artery Disease Prevention 
 
1.4 
Principles of Screening for Coronary Artery Disease Risk Factors 
 
1.5 
Situational Analysis of Risk Factors for CAD 
 
1.6 
Definition of Risk Factors 
 
1.7 
Prioritisation for Coronary Heart Disease Prevention 
 
1.8 
Scientific Basis for Risk Factor Modification 
 
Conclusion 
 
References 
 
Recommendations
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
54
1. 1 
INTRODUCTION AND RATIONALE 
 
  
Worldwide, the mortality from cardiovascular disease is projected to rise from 
13.2 million in 1985 to 24.5 million, an 85% increase in three decades. This 
indication has led the World Health Organisation to term coronary heart disease 
as the ‘World’s public health enemy number 1’. By 2015, the increase in 
cardiovascular deaths will be more than double in developing nations, jumping 
from 72 million to 167 million, or by 132 percent increase in thirty years, while 
mortality in industrialized nations will rise by 28 percent. This means that 
coronary artery disease will become the leading killer in both developing and 
developed country. 
 
 
 
Coronary artery disease has also been identified as the primary non-
communicable health problem in Mauritius, accounting for nearly one-third 
deaths in Mauritius.  It has a profound and adverse impact on household, families 
and society and is a major contributor to morbidity, invalidity and mortality. 
 
 
Pharmacological approaches, intensive care units, coronary angioplasty and 
bypass surgery can reduce modality from coronary heart disease by one third. 
However, two third of the decline is credited to measures such a healthy diets, 
exercise and smoking cessation, optimum control of blood pressure and a normo-
glycemic level of glucose. Premature death of Mauritians can be avoided and 
quality of life improved if a comprehensive risk factors intervention program for 
CAD can be implemented at the primary health care level, widely perceived to be 
the backbone of a rational health service system. 
 
1.2 
DEFINITION OF PRIMARY PREVENTION 
 
Primary prevention refers to guidance given to persons with no known 
cardiovascular disease. The first goal of prevention is to prevent the development 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
55
of risk factors.  The primary care physicians should regularly check for smoking, 
physical inactivity, elevated lipid levels, elevated blood sugar, high blood 
pressure and eating habits and other environmental hygiene factors. 
 
1.3 
OBJECTIVES OF CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE PREVENTION  
 
The objectives of a coronary artery disease prevention program at the first level of 
contact of a health system are to: 
a. Remain free from coronary heart diseases and enjoy an improved quality of 
life. 
b. Reduce the risk of coronary heart disease events and thereby reduce premature 
disability, mortality and extend overall survival. 
c. Decrease the need for interventional procedures such as angioplasty, bypass 
grafting and thereby decreasing hospital costs. 
d. Reduce the incidence of subsequent myocardial infarctions 
 
1.9 
PRINCIPLES OF SCREENING FOR CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE 
RISK FACTORS: 
 
A coronary artery disease prevention program must meet a number of criteria 
before it can be used in the general population. These criteria include: 
1. Coronary heart disease is a serious public health problem. 
2. Techniques for risk factor detection are easy, precise, cost-effective and 
acceptable to the community. 
3. There is a defined screening strategy and a defined intervention and 
follow-up policy. 
4. Trained staff and facilities for screening and intervention are available. 
5. Screening and intervention results in a reduction in clinical events, 
including morbidity and mortality. 
6. Screening has no adverse effects. 
7.  Cost of screening and intervention is justified in relation to the outcome. 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
56
 
 
 
All these 7 criteria are met by CAD in Mauritius, qualifying a screening 
programme. 
 
1.5 
SITUATIONAL ANALYSIS OF RISK FACTORS FOR CAD 
 
NATIONAL RISK FACTORS OF CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE 
SURVEYS (87/92/98) 
 
Table one:  Prevalence of selected risk factors for CAD in adults aged 25 and above 
Risk Factors 
87 
92 
98 
1. Obesity % 
Male 
      Female 
 
24.8 
35.7 
 
33.4 
47.7 
 
36.1* 
44.2* 
2. Smoking 
Male 
      Female 
 
57.9 
7.0 
 
 
47.3 
4.8 
 
42 
3.3 
3. Abusive Alcohol intake 
Male 
      Female 
 
17.0 
1.3 
 
22.2 
2.7 
 
23.2* 
7.0* 
4. Physical Activity 
Male 
      Female 
 
 
17.0 
1.3 
 
 
22.2 
2.7 
 
 
23.2 
7.0 
5. Lipids 
a. Male 
 
      Total cholesterol > 5.2 mmol 
 
      HDL cholesterol < 1.0 mmol 
 
      Triglycerides > 2.0 mmol  
 
b. Female 
 
      Total cholesterol > 5.2 mmol 
 
      HDL cholesterol < 1.0 mmol 
 
      Triglycerides > 2.0 mmol  
 
 
 
56.4 
 
22.7 
 
28.2 
 
 
 
52.9 
 
13.9 
 
13.7 
 
 
 
33.8 
 
18.4 
 
25.1 
 
 
 
31.7 
 
9.2 
 
11.2 
 
 
 
49.7* 
 
57.0* 
 
41.1* 
 
 
 
37.6* 
 
47.3* 
 
22.2* 
 
N.B: 
* 
problem areas where primary prevention measures need to be reinforced 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
57
DIABETES 
MELLITUS 
AND 
IMPAIRED 
GLUCOSE 
TOLERANCE 
PREVALENCE NATIONAL SURVEYS 87/92/98 IN ADULTS AGED 25 AND 
ABOVE 
 
 
87 
92 
98 
MEN 
DM Prevalence % 
IGT Prevalence % 
 
14.2 
15.6 
 
 
16.3 
14.9 
 
 
20.8 
11.8 
WOMEN 
DM Prevalence % 
IGT Prevalence % 
 
14.5 
22.5 
 
17.4 
19.3 
 
20.6 
20.2 
 
PREVALENCE OF HYPERTENSION IN ADULTS AGED 25 AND ABOVE  
 
 
87 
92 
98 
MEN 
 
31.7 
26.5 
30.0 
WOMEN 
 
30.2 
26.2 
29.6 
 
 
1.6  
DEFINITION OF RISK FACTOR 
 
  
The term risk factor describes those “characteristics found in healthy individuals 
to be independently related to the subsequent occurrence of coronary heart disease 
and, where modifiable, to be reversible.’ For example, cholesterol is an 
independent risk factor for coronary heart disease.   Epidemiological and 
evidence-based studies have shown that cholesterol lowering by one percent is 
associated with a decrease in the risk of coronary heart disease of about 2%. 
There is overwhelming scientific evidence that lifestyle modification and risk 
factor reduction can retard the development of coronary heart disease both before 
and after the occurrence of a clinical event. Previously undue emphasis was 
placed on individually high risk factors rather than the overall level of risk based 
on a combination of risk factors. A multifactorial assessment of coronary heart 
disease acknowledges 3 important facts: 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
58
  
 
  1.   Coronary heart disease has a multifactorial aetiology 
 
2. Risk factors have a multiplicative effect. 
3. As physicians, we are dealing with the whole person (holistic view), 
not isolated risk factors. 
 
LIFESTYLE AND CHARACTERISTICS ASSOCIATED WITH INCREASED 
RISK OF FUTURE CHD EVENTS 
 
Lifestyles 
Modifiable characteristics 
Non-modificable 
characteristics 
Diet high in saturated fat, 
cholesterol and calories 
 
 
Tobacco smoking 
 
 
 
 
 
Excess alcohol consumption 
Sedentary life  
Sustained psycho-emotional 
stress 
Elevated blood pressure 
 
 
 
Elevated plasma   Total cholesterol 
                             LDL cholesterol 
Low HDL cholesterol 
Elevated plasma TG 
 
 
Diabetes 
Obesity 
Thrombogenic factor ? 
 
Age 
 
 
 
Sex  
Post menopause 
 
 
 
 
 
Family 
history 
of 
CHD at early age  
Male < 55 yrs 
Females < 65 yrs 
 
 
1.7 
PRIORITIZATION FOR CORONARY HEART DISEASE PREVENTION 
 
 
Primary prevention activities for coronary heart disease should be downsized and 
prioritized under the following targeted groups: 
 
a. Patients with established coronary heart disease should be given first priority 
for prevention as they are at high risk of fatal and non-fatal complications of 
their disease. 
b. Next priority should be given to individuals in the general population who are 
at high risk of developing coronary heart disease. 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
59
 
c. Third priority for prevention is close relatives of patients with very early onset 
of coronary heart disease particularly the first-degree blood relatives of 
patients. 
d. Increasing age, ethnicity, socially economically deprived communities, 
geographical regions are other variables to be considered for primary 
prevention.  
 
 
1.8  SCIENTIFIC BASIS FOR RISK FACTOR MODIFICATION 
 
 Unifactorial randomized control trials of diet; blood pressure and cholesterol 
lowering have shown reductions in cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.  
However, the WHO collaborating group study has confirmed that the multi 
factorial intervention is more cost effective in modifying the risk factors of CAD. 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
60
A.  
DIET 
 
 
 
Diet is a determinant of CAD. Its effect on the development of atherosclerosis is 
mediated through the influence of biological risk factors e.g. LDL, HDL, BP, 
obesity, diabetes and hypertension. 
 
A healthy diet is characterized as: 
 
1. 
Low in saturated fatty acids 
2. 
High in unsaturated fatty acids 
3. 
Rich in complex carbohydrates 
 
  
The traditional Mediterranean diet (low saturated fat + high unsaturated fat 
especially monounsaturated) and Japanese diet (low saturated fat + high complex 
carbohydrates) are associated with the best life expectancy in the world. The 
physician’s training does not encompass aspects of dietary counseling. Therefore, 
assistance from a dietician or a specially trained nurse for dietary interviews is of 
considerable value. 
 
B.  
OBESITY 
 
 
Obesity can be assessed by three measures mainly: 
a. Body mass index 
b. Waist hip ratio 
c. Waist circumference 
 
 
a. 
Body mass index 
 
 
Body weight is expressed in terms of BMl. It is calculated as weight in kg 
/ height (in m2) squared and is recommended by the WHO expert 
committee for assessing degree of obesity as shown in the table below. 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
61
 
ASSESSMENT OF OBESITY USING BODY MASS INDEX 
 
Body mass index (kg/m2) 
WHO classification 
Popular description 
< 18.5 
Underweight 
Thin 
18.5 – 24.9 
Normal weight 
Normal weight 
25.0 – 29.9 
Grade 1 overweight 
Overweight 
30.0 – 39.9 
Grade 2 overweight 
Obese 
> 40.0 
Grade 3 overweight 
Morbidity obese 
 
 
 
 
b. 
Waist hip ratio 
 
 
 
The ratio of hip to waist circumference is also widely used in 
epidemiology as an index of central obesity. Central obesity with the 
accumulation of fat to the trunk and abdominal cavity is associated with 
high prevalence of lipid abnormalities, hypertension and abnormal glucose 
tolerance and insulin resistance leading to increased coronary artery 
disease. The normal value of waist hip ratio should not be greater than 1. 
 
 
 c. 
Waist circumference 
 
 
There is also good evidence from population based studies that waist 
circumference is also a useful index of obesity. Measurement of waist 
circumference (one measurement and no calculation with the person 
standing), midway between the lowest rib and the iliac crest, is also 
recommended for clinical assessment of the degree of obesity and follow 
up during weight reduction. 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
62
 
ACTION LEVELS FOR WAIST CIRCUMFERENCE IN MEN & WOMEN 
 
 
Non-obese 
Action level 
(Alerting zone) 
Action Level 2 
(Professional advice 
needed) 
Men 
 
< 94 cm 
94 – 101 cm 
> 102 cm 
Women 
 
< 80 cm 
80 – 87 cm 
> 88 cm 
 
C. 
SMOKING 
 
 
The health hazards of smoking are well documented.   Smoking is responsible for 
50% of all avoidable deaths and one half of these are due to cardiovascular death. 
The risk of future cardiovascular death is particularly high if smoking starts 
before the age of 15. Passive smoking also increases the risk of cardiovascular 
disease. According to WHO estimates, annual premature adult mortality among 
males in developed countries due to smoking is 800,000 per year. Of this total, 
300,000, (40%) occur due to cardiovascular disease. 
 
SMOKING PATTERN ACROSS DEVELOPED & DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 
 
 
Global 
Developed countries 
Developing countries 
Men 
 
48% 
41% 
50% 
Women 
 
12% 
21% 
8% 
 
 
D. 
ALCOHOL 
 
Alcohol consumption shows a J-shaped OR U-shaped relationship to the risk of 
all cause mortality.  Moderate use of alcohol (10 – 30 g of ethanol per day for 
men and 10 – 20 g for women) is considered safe.  Safe drinking levels increase 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
63
plasma HDL cholesterol and this may explain the protective effect of alcohol.  
However, heavy drinking particularly binge drinking, increases the risk of sudden 
arrhythmic death.  According to the Mauritius non-communicable disease survey 
1998 (preliminary report), alcohol consumption like smoking does not vary 
significantly across age groups.  However, the proportion of heavy drinkers is 
highest in men in their forties.  Hence, this group should be targeted to prevent 
the harmful effects of alcohol related problems. 
 
E. 
PLASMA LIPIDS 
 
Plasma lipids can be measured by using: 
 
1. 
Friedwald’s formula 
2. 
Ratio of total cholesterol to HDL cholesterol 
 
 
1. 
FRIEDWALD’S FORMULA 
 
 
Total cholesterol, triglycerides and HDL cholesterol are measured in our 
laboratory from a venous sample taken in the non-fasting state.  With 
these three measurements, the part of cholesterol carried in LDL can be 
calculated according to Friedwald’s formula. 
 
a. 
In mmol per litre (normal value LDL - C < 3.0 mmol per litre) 
 
LDL cholesterol = total cholesterol – HDL cholesterol – (0.45 x 
triglyceride level) 
 
b. 
In mg per deciliter (normal LDL – C < 115 mg per deciliter) 
 
LDL cholesterol = total cholesterol – HDL cholesterol – (0.2 x 
triglyceride level) 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
64
 
Friedwald’s calculation is a cheaper and more reliable estimation of LDL 
cholesterol than commercially available direct measurement of LDL-
cholesterol based on immuno separation. 
 
2. 
RATIO OF TOTAL CHOLESTEROL TO HDL-CHOLESTEROL 
 
 
Measurement of the above ratio is also a good indicator of risk.  A total 
cholesterol/HDL ratio > 5, indicates coronary heart disease risk. 
 
 
HDL cholesterol is cardio-protective whereas LDL cholesterol causes 
atherosclerosis.  High triglyceride levels (> 2.0 mmol) have also been 
identified as a risk factor for coronary heart disease. A large body of 
evidence has demonstrated that cholesterol lowering reduces the risk of 
coronary heart disease events. In general, a reduction of LDL cholesterol 
of 10% would lead to a reduction in the risk of coronary heart disease of 
about 20% and this has turned out to be the case in clinical trials of both 
primary and secondary prevention. 
 
There are four classes of lipid lowering drugs in current use (statins, 
fibrates, resins, niacin) and one or more drugs of each class have been 
shown to reduce CHD morbidity and mortality.  Evidence for efficacy and 
safety in primary prevention is strongest for the statins. 
 
F.  
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY 
 
  
Regular aerobic physical activities have favourable effects on body weight, blood 
pressure, plasma lipids, glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity. Physical activity 
recommendations have to define the intensity, duration and frequency of exercise. 
The intensity of exercise for healthy individuals is best defined in terms of target 
heart rate during peak exercise as shown below. 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
65
 
SUITABLE TARGET HEART RATE DURING EXERCISE, ACCORDING TO 
AGE [60-75% of maximum heart rate (220-age)] 
 
Age (years) 
Heart rate per minute 
20 – 29 
115 – 145 
30 – 39 
110 – 140 
40 – 49 
105 – 130 
50 – 59 
100 –125 
60 – 69 
95 – 115 
 
 
  
The target heart rate is easily achieved by exercises involving the use of large 
muscle groups.   Brisk walking, jogging, cycling, swimming, volleyball, aerobic 
dancing and rope jumping are examples of such activities. Below is provided an 
indication of the number of calories spent during various types of exercise: 
 
Brisk Walking 
3.6 calories/minute 
Jogging 
5.0 calories/minute 
Running 
5.0 calories/minute 
Swimming 
6.0 calories/minute 
Cycling 
4.5 calories/minute 
Tennis 
7.0 calories/minute 
 
 
The duration of physical activity should preferably be 30 – 40 minutes, including 
5 – 10 minutes warm up phase before the 20 – 30 minutes phase and 5 – 10 
minutes cool down phase at its end and as frequent as 4-5 times weekly. 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
66
G. 
BLOOD PRESSURE 
 
 
Many epidemiological studies have demonstrated the importance of elevated 
blood pressure as a risk for coronary heart disease in both men and women.  The 
decision to start drug therapy depends not only on the grading of blood pressure 
level but also on the overall cardiovascular risk which calls for a proper history, 
physical examination and laboratory examinations to identify the: 
 
 
1. 
Presence of cardiovascular disease 
2. 
Coexistence of risk factors 
3. 
Incidence of target organ damage 
 
Blood pressure should be lowered slowly and carefully because myocardial 
necrosis, coronary atherosclerosis and cardiac hypertrophy may render coronary 
autoregulation less effective in preserving organ perfusion when blood pressure is 
reduced too rapidly. 
 
(Refer to hypertension guidelines) 
 
H. 
DIABETES 
 
Type 1 and type 2 diabetes are associated with a marked increase of CHD.  The 
excess cardiovascular risk associated with type 1 diabetes becomes evident after 
the age of 30.  Type 2 diabetes is associated with more profound abnormalities in 
cardiovascular risk factors than type 1 diabetes.  Even IGT is associated with a 
cardiovascular risk pattern characteristic of type 2 diabetes namely high 
triglyceride level, low HDL value, increased value of hypertension and 
hyperinsulinemia. The Diabetes Complication and Control Trial (DCCT) showed 
that glucose control is important for the prevention of long term complications. 
 
 
(Refer to Diabetes Guidelines) 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
67
MODEL FOR PRIMARY AND SECONDARY PREVENTION PROGRAM FOR 
NCD 
 
 
Primary Prevention 
 
 
 
Secondary Prevention 
 
P 
 
Community 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I 
R 
 
Education 
 
Detection of   
Surveillance  
N 
I 
 
(Population)  
New Cases 
 
of old case 
 
T 
M 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E 
A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R 
R 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N 
 
 
 
 
 
Early  
 
Improved 
 
T 
 
 
 
 
 
Treatment 
 
Treatment 
 
I 
P 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
O 
R 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N 
E 
V 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   C 
E 
Modified 
N 
Environment  
Family/ 
 
 
 
 
   O 
T 
& Lifestyle 
 
Community 
  Decreased Complications 
I 
(Population)  
Awareness 
 
 
 
 
   N 
O 
N 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   T 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      Patient Education  
   R 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   O 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   L 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NCD 
 
 
 
 
     Complications 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
68
GUIDE TO COMPREHENSIVE RISK FACTOR REDUCTION FOR PATIENTS 
WITH CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE 
 
 
 
NO. 
RISK INTERVENTION 
RECOMMENDATION 
 
1. 
Smoking goal :  complete 
cessation 
Strongly encourage patient and family to stop 
smoking.  Provide counseling, nicotine replacement, 
group cessation program 
 
2. 
Physical activity 
Minimum goal 30 mins 3-4 
X/week 
Encourage minimum 30-60 mins, moderate intensity 
exercise 3-4 times/week (walking, jogging, cycling 
etc) maximum benefit 5-6 hours per week.  Advise 
medically supervised program for moderate to high 
risk patient 
 
3. 
Weight management 
Intensive diet and appropriate physical activity 
intervention.  Emphasize need for weight loss in 
patients with HBP, increased TG & glucose levels 
 
4. 
Blood pressure control 
Goal equal or less than 140/90 
mmHg 
Initiate lifestyle modification (weight control, 
physical activities, alcohol moderation, moderate 
sodium restriction)  
Add antihypertensive drug individualized to patient 
requirements if BP is more than 140/90, consistently 
raised for three months or if initial BP more than 
160/100 mmHg 
 
5. 
Diabetes management 
Euglycemic control 
Appropriate OHA to achieve near normal FPG.  
Treatment of other risks (e.g. exercise, management, 
BP and cholesterol management) 
 
6. 
Oestrogen 
Consider oestrogen replacement therapy in all post 
memopausal women especially those with multiple 
CHD risk factors. 
Individualise treatment 
 
7. 
Antiplatelets 
agents/anticoagulants 
Start ASA 75 to 300 mg if no contra indication.  
Manage warfarin to international normalized ratio 2 
to 3.5 for post MI not able to take aspirin 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
69
 
NO. 
RISK INTERVENTION 
RECOMMENDATION 
 
8. 
Lipid management  
Primary goal  
LDL < 100 mg/ dl  
Secondary goal 
HDL > 35 mg/dl 
Tg < 200 mg/dl 
Diet < 30 % fat, < 7% saturated fat, < 200 mg/day 
cholesterol 
Assess fasting lipid profile.  Post MI patient – 4 to 6 
weeks to stabilize.  Add drug therapy according to 
following guide : 
LDL < 
100 mg/dl 
No drug 
therapy  
Follow up 
every 5 
years 
 
 
 
 
 
LDL 100-
130 mg/dl  
Consider 
therapy to 
diet as 
follows 
 
 
LDL > 130 
mg/dl 
Add drug 
treatment to 
diet as follows 
 
HDL < 35 
mg/dl 
Emphasize 
weight 
management, 
physical 
activity, quit 
smoking, 
increased 
fruit 
consumption 
 
 
Suggested drug therapy 
 
Tg < 
200 
mg/dl 
Tg 
200-
400 
mg/dl 
 
Tg > 400 
mg/dl 
 
Statin 
 
Statin 
 
 
Niacin  
 
Niacin 
Combined 
treatment 
fibrate 
niacin + 
statin 
 
 
 
 
If LDL goal not achieved, 
consider combination 
therapy 
 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
70
CONCLUSION: 
 
  
There is no ideal response or  universal blue print to reverse the epidemic trends 
of CAD.  However, some common principles for a successful program on primary 
prevention of CAD should comprise a combination of the following features: 
 
1. 
Political will and leadership. 
 
2. 
A strategic plan - stakeholders (rnulti-sectorial and multi-level). 
 
 
• Situational analysis of past and present. 
• Functional information support system. 
• Goals, targets and implementation. 
• Protocols and guidelines. 
• Resources/downsizing and prioritization of services. 
• Technical support from international agencies. 
• Monitoring and evaluation. 
• Re-programming. 
 
 
3. 
Community involvement 
 
4. 
Access to secondary and tertiary care 
 
  
Thirty years ago, Eastern Finland was described as the world capital of 
cardiovascular mortality. The North Karelia Health Promotion project based on 
the adoption of healthy lifestyle had the following desirable outcomes: 
 
1. 
Coronary mortality for males 35 - 54 dropped by 51% (720 reduced to 350 
per 100,000). 
 
2. 
11% reduction in average blood cholesterol level. 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
71
3. 
Male smoking prevalence decreased by half to one third. 
 
4. 
Cancer mortality declined by 45 %. 
 
5. 
Finland now ranks 6th  for males and 14th  for females in death from CAD. 
 
  
Can Mauritius meet the challenge of reversing the trend in cardiovascular 
disease? The answer is positive because many risk factors are associated with a 
broad spectrum of non- communicable diseases which have been created by, and 
can be controlled by Mauritians themselves. 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
72
REFERENCES 
 
1. 
Is primary care essential? Barbara Starfleld. The Lancet. Vol 344. October 22 
1994. 
 
2. 
Prevention of coronary heart disease in clinical practice.  Task Force Report. 
 
Prepared by David Wood et al. European Heart Journal (1998) 19, 1434 – 1503. 
 
3. 
Guide to primary prevention of cardiovascular disease. A statement for Health 
Care professional. From the Task Force on Risk Reduction. PREPARED BY Scot 
M et al. 
 
4. 
How to implement physical activity in primary and secondary prevention. 
American Heart Association. Gerald F Fletcher. AHA Medical/ Scientific 
Statement. 
 
5. 
Mauritius Non Communicable Disease Surveys 87/92. 
 
6. 
Mauritius Non Communicable Disease Surveys 98. A preliminary report. 
 
7. 
National Health Statistic 1999. 
 
8. 
1999 World Health Organisation - International Society of hypertension. Journal 
of hypertension 1999, 17: 151 – 183. 
 
9. 
Epidemic of Cardiovascular Disease in post communist countries. Heart beat 
number 3, September 1995. Journal of International society and federation of 
cardiology. 
 
10. 
Asian medical Journal. Vol 14 number 9, September 1997 Counter measures for 
smoking cessation. 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
73
11. 
Control of cardiovascular disease in developing countries – research, development 
and institutional strengthening. Chrostopher P Housen et al. Bulletin of World 
Health Federation. Number 1. March 1999. 
 
12. 
Physical Activity for healthy adults as a primary prevention intervention in the 
clinical setting. Sally S Haris et al. JAMA, June 23/30 - 1999 vol 261 number 24. 
 
13. 
Physical exercise in the management of hypertension. Kikua Arakawa - Asian 
Medical Journal. Vol 43. number 3- 107- 111, March 2000. 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
74
Behavioural change 
 
Procjaska and Diclemente have proposed a ‘stages of change’ model (387-388) 
which argues that everyone is not equally ready to change their behaviour at a 
given point in time even if they have all been invited to have screening and risk 
factor modification. They maintain that it is important to assess the individual’s 
behaviour thoughts, attitudes and beliefs concerning their perceived ability to 
change, their behaviour over the past 6 months as well as the environmental 
context in which they will attempt to change, and maintain the lifestyle change. 
 
Five stages are proposed: pre-contemplation, contemplation, preparation action 
and maintenance. In the pre-contemplation stage, individuals do not intend to 
change their high-risk behaviour in the foreseeable future i.e over the next 6 
months. Individuals can be in this stage because: 
 
(a) they are unaware of the long-term consequences of their behaviour 
(b) they are discouraged about their ability to change and do not want to think 
about it 
(c) they are defensive due to social pressure to change. Pre-contemplation is a 
very stable stage. As a group they evaluate the pros of their risk behaviour as 
greater than the cons. 
 
Contemplation is the stage where people seriously intend to change their 
behaviour within the next 6 months. Despite their intentions, however, they 
typically stay in this stage for long periods of time, e.g. 2 years or more. They talk 
about change, but keep putting it off. Those who substitute thinking for acting are 
called chronic contemplators. Contemplators evaluate the pros and cons of their 
behaviour as about equal; hence there is considerable ambivalence about 
changing. 
 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
75
People in these first two stages should not enter behaviour change programme, eg. 
Smoking cessation, dietary or exercise programme. Most current smokers are in 
these stages. Instead they should be provided with information, motivation and 
advice that will help them move to the next stage, in which behavioural change is 
seriously considered. 
 
In the preparation stage, individuals intend to take action in the near future, 
typically within the next month. They have a plan of action, and have usually 
some modest behavioural change, such as reducing the number of cigarettes 
smoked per day or slightly modifying diet. In this stage there are both behavioural 
and intentional criteria; the cons are evaluated as greater than the pros. In this 
stage, cues to action should be provided, such as the demonstration of association 
between lifestyle and symptoms, illness in other family members, social pressures 
and so on. 
 
Overt behavioural change within the past six months characterises the action 
stage, which is highly unstable and where the greatest risk for relapse may occur. 
The criterion for achieving this stage is to have actually changed behaviour, eg. 
Stopped smoking, as opposed to reducing smoking or switching brand to lower 
tar, etc., During this period most of the processes of change come into play and 
the intrapersonal (eg. Perceived self-efficacy), interpersonal (e.g. social support) 
and environmental (eg. Unavoidable exposure to smoking environment) factors 
associated with these processes are principal determinants of whether the newly 
quit smoker proceeds to the next stage    (maintenance) or regresses to the earliest 
stage. Obviously this is the critical period where all the interventions strategies 
must focus on the above mentioned processes. A wide variety of instructive 
materials are usually available from national Heart Associations and Foundations 
including tailored self-instruction programmes, support groups and counselling 
strategies. 
 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
76
Maintenance is considered from six months after an individual has changed 
behaviour until about five years of continuous maintenance has elapsed. (N.B. :  
Most smoking cessation programmes consider six months to one-year continuous 
abstinence as “success”). For example, smokers who successfully move from 
action to maintenance demonstrate a gradual decrease in overall temptation and 
lower use of cognitive/experiential processes, and a heightened confidence and 
greater use of behavioural techniques such as stimulus control, counter-
conditioning, helping relationship and contingency management. Mapping out 
templates of change associated with successful recovery could allow comparisons 
to be made across smoking and alcohol problems to highlight the general 
principles underlying successful addictive behaviour change. 
 
In summary, behaviour change programmes achieve much higher success rates 
when they assess the state or readiness of the individual to commit to the change 
process. The ‘stages of change’ model reviewed here is becoming increasing 
employed by health care professionals who are concerned with treating and/or 
referring patients for appropriate assistance, as it proves it’s value in providing 
services to those who are ready to benefit from them. 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
77
Coronary Risk Chart (not intended for clinically established CHD patients), has several 
functions: 
 
- absolute risk of developing CHD over next 10 years can be read off the chart without 
any calculations. 
 
Lifetime risk can be read by following the tables upwards (increased risk with increase 
in age). 
 
Relative risk can readily be estimated by comprising the risk in one cell with any other in 
the same age group. 
 
- One can predict the effect of changing from one risk category to another. For example, 
the reduction in risk associated with cessation of smoking, reduction of BP or cholesterol 
level can readily be shown to an individual. 
 
- a Coronary Risk Chart developed by each country is recommended. May be constructed 
from results of prospective cohort studies. 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
78
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
79
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
80
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
81
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
82
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
83
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
84
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
1. 
All Area Health Centres and Community Health Centres 
should have an ECG apparatus 
 
 
2. 
All Nurses should be trained to do ECG 
 
 
3. 
Doctors should be re-trained in interpreting ECG’s 
 
 
4. 
Morphia should be made available at all Area Health Centres 
and Community Health Centres 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Health and Quality of Life/Mauritius Institute of Health/World Health Organisation  
85
