Stepwise Guide for Diagnosis 
and Management of Acute Fever 
in Primary Care
Message From President and  
Hon. Secretary-General 
We, at the Indian Medical Association (IMA), a national voluntary organization of doctors of 
modern scientific allopathy system of medicine, look after the interest of doctors as well as 
the well-being of the community at large.
Our objective is to promote and advance medical and allied sciences and their different 
branches. We aim to promote the improvement of public health and medical education 
in India. Hence, IMA has taken a step forward for developing recommendations based on 
a thorough literature review and robust evidence for assisting general practitioners (GPs) 
to perform accurate diagnosis and stepwise management of acute fever in India. A group 
meeting was conducted among GPs, pediatricians, internal medicine specialists, and chest 
physicians, where important issues related to the stepwise management of acute fever were 
discussed.
We feel immense pleasure in announcing that the final recommendation from the meeting 
has been derived and has been published and it is accessible to all.
We thank all the experts for their participation in developing these recommendations so 
that these can be utilized by GPs for the diagnosis and stepwise management of acute fever 
effectively in the Indian scenario.
Dr. JA Jayalal	
Dr. Jayesh Lele
National President, 	
Hon. Secretary-General (HSG)  
Indian Medical Association	
Indian Medical Association                                 
2
INTRODUCTION
Broad Classification of Acute Fever 
Acute fever, an elevation in core body temperature above the daily range (98.6ºF), is one of the most 
common presenting complaints to physicians in primary care and outpatient departments in India.1–3 It has 
a wide spectrum of differential diagnoses from infectious to noninfectious causes. Acute undifferentiated 
febrile illnesses (AUFI) are characterized by fever (>38.3°C or 101.0°F) for greater than 2 days (Figure 1) and 
lasting up to 14 days without organ-specific symptoms at the onset.4,5 The severity of AUFIs ranges from 
mild or self-limiting to life-threatening illness.5 Some of the common causes of AUFIs include malaria, 
dengue, enteric fever, leptospirosis, and scrub typhus, which continue to contribute significantly to the 
febrile disease burden in India.5 Malaria and dengue are the most prevalent febrile illness-associated forms 
of fever in India.6 India is estimated to contribute to 34% of the total global burden of dengue.7 Studies 
have reported the incidence of leptospirosis that ranges from 3% to 7% in India.6,8 A retro-prospective 
observational study by Mittal et al. evaluated the etiologies of AUFIs in adult patients (N=2547; aged greater 
than 18 years) presenting with acute fever (duration: 5–14 days).9 The study revealed the heavy burden of 
tropical infections, such as dengue with an incidence of 37.54% followed by enteric fever (16.5%), scrub 
typhus (14.42%), bacterial sepsis (10.3%), malaria (6.8%), and leptospirosis (0.14%).9 Acute fever or acute 
febrile illness (AFI) can also arise due to localized infections, such as respiratory tract infections (RTIs), 
urinary tract infections (UTIs), intra-abdominal infections (IAIs), or skin and soft tissue infections (SSTIs).4,5 
Fevers of unknown origins (FUOs) are differentiated from AUFIs or localized AFIs by a prolonged state 
of fever (≥38.3°C or 101.0°F for 21 days or longer) without an etiology after a hospital work-up or 1 week of 
inpatient evaluation.10,11 
Stepwise Guide for Diagnosis and Management of 
Acute Fever in Primary Care
Figure 1: Classification of acute fever.4,5,10–12
BJIs: Bone and joint infections; CAP: Community-acquired pneumonia; COVID-19: Coronavirus disease of 2019; IAI: Intra-abdominal infection; RTIs: Respiratory tract 
infections; SSTIs: Skin and soft tissue infections;UTIs: Urinary tract infections.   
Acute undifferentiated  
febrile illness (AUFls)
Algorithm 1
Acute onset of fever >38.3°C (101.0°F) 
for >2 days and lasting up to 14 days 
without organ- or system-specific 
signs at the onset.4,5
Note: With history of no localizing 
symptoms except accompaniments  
of fever, such as chills, headaches,  
retro-orbital pain, myalgia, malaise, 
nausea, or vomiting.
 Malaria
 Dengue
 Enteric fever
 Chikungunya
 Leptospirosis
 Japanese encephalitis
 Scrub typhus
Fever of unknown origin (FUO)
Defined as fever 38.3°C (101°F) for >21 days 
that remains undiagnosed after a hospital 
work-up.10,11
 Malignancy: Colorectal cancer, leukemia
 Noninfectious inflammatory disease: 
Rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus 
erythematosus, Crohn’s disease, sarcoidosis, 
vasculitis syndromes
Note: Symptoms that can help direct the 
evaluation toward noninfectious causes 
include heart palpitations, sweating, heat 
intolerance (hyperthyroidism), recurrent or 
cyclic symptoms (rheumatoid, inflammatory, 
or hereditary disorder)12
 Drug-induced fever due to medications such 
as carbamazepine, cimetidine, captopril, 
heparin and methyldopa, and allopurinol
For management approach for FUO:  
Refer to specialist.
Acute febrile illness (AFI) 
due to localized infections 
with system-specific  
signs.4,5
 RTls: Cough, dyspnea
 UTls: Dysuria, hematuria
 IAls: Abdominal pain, 
diarrhea, vomiting
 SSTls: Abscess, cellulitis
 BJIs
 Viral fever/COVID-19
Acute fever
3
Unmet Needs in Management of Acute Fever in Primary Care
Acute fever has myriad causes. The diverse infectious etiologies often overlap and present a challenge to 
the treating physicians.
The majority of patients with 
acute fever present at clinics with 
nonspecific symptoms, such as 
low-grade fever, general malaise, 
headache, arthralgia, myalgia, and 
rash with or without a focal point of 
infection.4,5,13 
A common approach to the management 
of acute fever relies on the use of empirical 
antibiotics and supportive therapy with 
antipyretics.3 Given the difficulty in 
discriminating the etiology of fever based 
on clinical features alone results in the 
inappropriate or overuse of antibiotics/
antimalarial drugs in primary care contributing 
significantly to the development of antimicrobial 
resistance (AMR).2,15
The diagnosis of acute fever is not always definitive based on clinical presentation alone, and correct 
diagnosis is reached only with definite diagnostic tests.3,5 The nonspecific and overlapping clinical 
symptoms along with nonavailability of appropriate diagnostic modalities present a challenge to the 
treating physicians and can make timely treatment difficult.2,14 
PATTERNS OF FEVER AND APPROACHES TO MEASURE TEMPERATURE 
Based on the pattern, fever can be classified into sustained/continuous fever, intermittent fever, and 
remittent fever. 
 Continuous or sustained fever is termed as fever that does not fluctuate more than about 1°C (1.5°F) 
for 24 hours, but at no time touches normal (37°C–38°C). This pattern of fever is characteristic of lobar 
and Gram-negative pneumonia, typhoid, acute bacterial meningitis, and UTIs.16 
 Intermittent fever is defined as fever present only for several hours during the day and can be seen 
in malaria, pyogenic infections, tuberculosis, lymphomas, and septicemia.16
 Remittent fever is defined as fever with daily fluctuations exceeding 2°C but at no time touches 
normal and can be seen in patients with infective endocarditis and rickettsial infections.16
4
Table 1 lists the pros and cons of approaches available for measuring temperature during 
acute  fever17–20
Table 1: Comparison of different methods for measuring body temperature during acute fever17–20
Approaches
Pros
Cons
Rectal thermometry involves temperature 
measurement by inserting the thermometer 
into the rectum via the anus.
 Accurate way of 
core temperature 
measurement at 
steady state
 Most reliable for 
assessing exertional 
heat stroke
 Uncomfortable
 Rectal temperatures are 
slow to change in relation to 
changing core temperature 
and rectal readings are 
affected by the depth of the 
measurement, conditions 
affecting local blood flow, and 
the presence of stool
 May underestimate hepatic or 
brain hyperthermia
 Potential for the transmission 
of stool-borne pathogens
 Rarely traumatic injury to the 
rectum
Axillary thermometry involves temperature 
measurement by inserting the thermometer 
over the axillary artery for greater than 
4 minutes.
 Convenient to use
 Inexpensive
 Approximates core 
temperature in 
newborns
 Takes a longer time to reach 
equilibrium and is altered 
by various factors, such as 
ambient temperature, sweat, 
humidity, and density of hair.
Oral thermometry is performed by inserting 
a thermometer into the mouth under the 
tongue for 3–4 minutes reflecting the 
temperature of the lingual arteries.
 Convenient to use
 Inexpensive
 Hazards of broken glass and 
mercury
 Underestimates core 
temperature due to air or 
variable probe placement
Cont’d to next page...
5
Table 1: Comparison of different methods for measuring body temperature during acute fever17–20
Approaches
Pros
Cons
Tympanic thermometry relies on the use 
of small hand-held devices with a probe 
that is inserted into the patient’s ear canal. 
The sensor at the end of the probe of 
the tympanic device records the infrared 
radiation and converts it into a temperature 
reading.
 Ease and speed  
   of use
 More closely 
estimates core 
temperature than 
oral methods
 Reasonably accurate 
in children and 
adults
 Accuracy is limited by air or 
cerumen in the ear canal
Noncontact handheld infrared 
thermometry involves the use of a lens to 
focus the infrared energy onto a detector, 
which converts the energy to an electrical 
signal that can be displayed in temperature 
measurement after being compensated for 
ambient temperature variation.
 Useful for mass 
screening at public 
places, such 
as airports and 
shopping malls
 Not reliable 
 The accuracy of 
measurements depends on 
the subject–thermometer 
distance and the angle at 
which it is aimed at the 
forehead 
 Pregnancy and menstruation 
might be associated with 
raised forehead temperature 
and affect measurements 
 Intense perspiration and air 
conditioning can decrease the 
cutaneous temperature and 
affect the reliability of results
Mercury-free digital thermometers are recommended 
over traditional mercury thermometers for temperature 
measurement in primary care to avoid the potential 
hazards of broken glass and liquid mercury.21 
Digital thermometers are safe and provide faster, 
more accurate results as opposed to mercury 
thermometers.21–23
Note: 
 Digital thermometers should not be used beyond 1 year.
 Sterilization should be performed after every use by wiping the surface with 70%–90% of alcohol to minimize the chances of 
cross contamination. 
 Auxiliary thermometry is preferred over oral thermometry as it reduces the risk of cross-contamination.
...Cont’d from last page
6
STEPWISE APPROACH FOR DIAGNOSIS OF ACUTE FEVER IN PRIMARY CARE
Table 2 summarizes the stepwise approach for the identification of the root cause of acute fever in 
primary care settings.4,5
Table 2: Diagnostic flow of acute fever in primary care4,5
Step 1: Evaluation of medical 
history of the patient 
Consider factors: age, comorbidities, immunosuppression, and 
pregnancy.
Step 2: Thorough clinical 
examination of the patient
A complete and thorough physical examination is mandatory. 
 A search is required for hidden foci, such as throat examination, 
sinus tenderness, renal or hepatic tenderness, heart murmurs, 
chest examination, lymph nodes, and splenomegaly. 
 Fundus examination (if headache or bleeding tendency) and 
examination of the skin for eschar and petechiae or purpura must 
be made. 
Step 3: Evaluation of clinical 
features and assessment of 
disease severity
 Consider key features: onset, duration, and course of fever; key 
rule-in and rule-out features; and characteristic pattern of organ 
involvement.
 Rule out localized infections for AUFIs. 
 Look for localized infections in system-specific AFIs.
 Assess for severity and triage.
Step 4: Perform diagnostic tests Perform first-line and, if possible, confirmatory diagnostic tests for 
acute fever.
AFIs: Acute febrile illnesses; AUFIs: Acute undifferentiated febrile illnesses.
Step 1: Evaluation of Medical History of Patient 
This step includes an assessment of the previous medical history of the patient, such as prior fevers, infections, 
or known conditions predisposing to infections.12 Patient-related factors, such as age, immunosuppression, 
pregnancy, and comorbidities (diabetes, chronic kidney disease, malignancy, autoimmune disease, 
rheumatologic fever, or liver impairment), can help narrow the differential diagnosis and provide vital 
clues.5,11, 24–27
Step 2: Clinical Examination of Patient
Preliminary clinical examination should involve the assessment of respiratory rate, hydration status, mental 
status, oropharynx, conjunctiva, skin, chest, heart, and abdomen.5,12,28,29,30 
Review of systems should include (i) febrile seizures; (ii) headache (sinusitis, meningitis); (iii) runny nose 
and congestion (viral UTI); (iv) cough or wheezing (pneumonia, bronchiolitis); (v) ear pain or waking in 
the night with signs of discomfort (otitis media); (vi) abdominal pain (pneumonia, strep pharyngitis, 
gastroenteritis, abdominal abscess); (vii) back pain (pyelonephritis); (viii) and joint swelling or redness 
(osteomyelitis).5,12,29,30  
Special attention should be provided to elderly patients with underlying conditions that predispose them 
to select infections, such as diabetes mellitus, poor swallowing or gag reflex, long-term indwelling urinary 
catheters, prosthetic devices (artificial joints leading to septic arthritis), altered mental status (for aspiration 
pneumonia), or chronic immobility.28
7
Step 3: Evaluation of Clinical Features and Assessment of Disease Severity
This step involves the evaluation of disease onset, key rule-in and rule-out clinical features, the pattern 
of organ involvement (if any), and red flags.5 Figure 2 details the clinical features of tropical AUFIs 
and red flags (in adult and pediatric patients) indicating the need for hospitalization, referral, and urgent 
treatment.24–27
Dengue31,32
Onset:
IP: 3–14 days with acute onset of high-grade 
continuous fever (onset of symptom average 
4–7 days)
Clinical features:
 Dengue fever: Headache, retro-orbital pain, 
myalgia, arthralgia, and rash
 Dengue hemorrhagic fever: 
Thrombocytopenia, mucosal and 
gastrointestinal bleeds, rise in hematocrit
 Dengue shock syndrome: Weak pulse, 
hypotension
 Expanded dengue syndrome: Encephalitis, 
myocarditis, hepatitis, renal failure, ARDS, and 
hemophagocytosis
Malaria31,32
Onset:
Plasmodium falciparum (IP: 9–14 days)   
Plasmodium vivax (IP: 10–14 days)
Clinical features: 
 Acute onset of high-grade intermittent fever
 Paroxysm of fever, shaking chills, and sweats 
occur every 48 hours or 72 hours, depending 
on species
Manifestations of severe malaria
 Cerebral malaria, severe anemia, metabolic 
acidosis, and acute renal failure
 ARDS and shock
Figure 2: Evaluation of clinical features of AUFIs and assessment of disease severity.5,12,31–33 
Key Points to Consider During Evaluation in Special Population:
 Normal body temperature ranges in pediatrics are higher than 
in adults and should be taken into attention when diagnosing 
fever.12
 Symptoms that can help direct the evaluation toward 
noninfectious causes in pediatric patients include: (i) heart 
palpitations; (ii) recurrent/cyclic symptoms (rheumatoid, 
inflammatory, or hereditary disorder); and (iii) sweating/heat 
intolerance.12
 Pregnancy-related immunosuppression is associated with 
an increased severity of falciparum malaria. Influenza, UTIs, 
pneumonia, tonsillitis, influenza, viral gastroenteritis, and kidney 
infection are other causes of fever in pregnant women and 
should be considered during differential diagnosis step.5,29,30
 Gastroenteritis, SSTI, UTI, and pneumonia are familiar issues 
among older adults with fever and should be considered 
during evaluation.28
Cont’d to next page...
8
Enteric fever31,32
Onset:
IP: 1–14 days
Clinical features:
 First week: Fever, headache, and 
relative bradycardia
 Second week: Abdominal 
pain, diarrhea, constipation, 
hepatosplenomegaly, and 
encephalopathy
 Third week: Intestinal bleeding, 
perforation, and MODS
Chikungunya33
Onset:
IP: 1–12 days (Onset of symptom: average 3–7 days)
Clinical features:
Acute onset of moderate-to–high grade continuous fever, 
rash, malaise, arthralgia, myalgia, and red eyes
Complications:
 Respiratory failure
 Cardiovascular decompensation
 Myocarditis
 Acute hepatitis
 Renal failure
 Hemorrhage
 Meningoencephalitis
 Acute flaccid paralysis
Leptospirosis31,32
Onset:
IP: 2–26 days (onset of symptom: average 6–10 days)
Acute onset of moderate-to–high grade continuous 
fever
Anicteric leptospirosis:
 Abrupt onset of fever, chills, headache, and myalgia
 Abdominal pain, conjunctival suffusion, and transient 
skin rash
Icteric leptospirosis: 
 Jaundice, proteinuria, hematuria, oliguria, and/or 
anuria
 Pulmonary hemorrhages, ARDS, and myocarditis
Scrub typhus31,32
Onset:
IP: 1–3 weeks
Clinical features:
 Fever, headache, and myalgia
 Breathing difficulty, delirium, vomiting, 
cough, and jaundice
Complications:
 Overwhelming pneumonia with  
ARDS-like presentation
 Hepatitis
 Aseptic meningitis
 Myocarditis and disseminated 
intravascular coagulation
Japanese encephalitis31,32
Onset:
IP: Averages 6–8 days, with a range of 4–15 days.
Clinical features:
 Prodromal period: Fever, headache, vomiting, and myalgia
 Neurological features range from mild confusion to agitation to overt coma
 Parkinson-like extrapyramidal signs are common, including tremor, rigidity, and choreoathetoid 
movements
...Cont’d from last page
Cont’d to next page...
9
Criteria for immediate attention and referral in fever in pediatric patients.12
 Age <1 month
 Petechiae or purpura
 Lethargy, listlessness, or toxic appearance
 Inconsolable crying
 Respiratory distress
 Seizures, difficulty to stay awake, and stiff neck
AUFIs: Acute undifferentiated febrile illnesses; ARDS: Acute respiratory distress syndrome; IP: Incubation period; MODS: Multiple organ dysfunction syndrome.
Figure 3 summarizes the characteristic clinical features and complications associated with different types 
of AFIs due to localized infections.4,32,34
Red flag signs in patients with AUFIs indicating the need for hospitalization,  
referral, and urgent treatment.5
 Prostration—Unable to stand, sit, or walk without support
 Temperature—Hyperpyrexia (temperature >41.5°C) or hypothermia (temperature <36°C) or rigors
 Respiration—Shortness of breath, respiratory rate >22 breaths/minute, cyanosis, arterial oxygen 
saturation <92% on room air
 Circulation—Blood pressure <100 mmHg systolic, cold clammy extremities, capillary refill >3 seconds
 Neurological—Altered mental status (Glasgow Coma Scale <13), convulsions, positive meningeal 
signs (such as neck stiffness and Kernig’s sign)
 Abdominal pain—Severe or persistent vomiting
 Severe conjunctival or palmar pallor
 Jaundice on examination of sclera
 Petechial or purpuric rash
 Bleeding—From nose, gums, or venipuncture sites; hematemesis, melena
Fever due to LRTI4
CAP is characterized by (i) symptoms of acute 
lower respiratory tract illness (cough with or 
without expectoration, shortness of breath, 
pleuritic chest pain) for less than 1 week and 
(ii) at least one systemic feature (temperature 
>37.7°C, chills, and rigors, and/or severe 
malaise).
Fever due to URTI4 
Presenting features of URTI include sore throat, 
runny/blocked nose, and cough with or without 
systemic symptoms including fever and malaise:
 Streptococcal pharyngitis: Sudden onset of fever 
and sore throat with pain during swallowing.
 Bacterial sinusitis: Worsening of symptoms or 
signs includes new-onset fever, headache, or 
increase in nasal discharge following a typical 
viral URTI that lasts for 5–6 days and was  
initially improving (double sickening).
Fever due to UTI4
Acute cystitis characterized by dysuria, 
frequency, and urgency with or without fever 
with chills. 
Acute pyelonephritis characterized by 
flank pain, tenderness, or both and fever 
associated with dysuria, urgency, and 
frequency. 
Fever due to BJI4
Septic arthritis includes acute onset of  
high-grade fever with tender swollen joint. 
Figure 3: Evaluation of clinical features associated with different types of AFIs due to localized  
infections. 4,32,34
...Cont’d from last page
Cont’d to next page...
10
Viral fever4,32,34
Viral pneumonia due to adenovirus, influenza A and B, 
human metapneumovirus, parainfluenza, rhinovirus, and 
cytomegalovirus. Characterized by high-grade fever, cough, 
sore throat, or myalgia
Note: Influenza-like illness is characterized by systemic signs, such as fever and 
malaise, along with the upper respiratory symptoms. The patients should be 
warned about symptoms, which indicate complications, such as breathing difficulty, 
persistent fever beyond 4–5 days, or ear pain. 
COVID-19 caused by SARS-CoV-2 is characterized by  
low-to–moderate grade continuous fever. IP: 2–4 days 
(onset of symptom average: 5–7 days). 
 Symptoms include cough, dyspnea, myalgia, headache, 
sore throat, diarrhea, rhinorrhea, tachypnea, decreased 
oxygen saturation, and multiorgan involvement.
 Complications include ARDS, arrhythmias, acute cardiac 
injury shock, pulmonary embolism, and acute stroke
Fever due to SSTI4
SSTIs involve features of 
inflammatory response, with other 
manifestations, such as fever, rapid 
progression of lesions, and bullae.
Cellulitis is characterized by clinically 
rapidly intensifying pain and redness. 
Fever and lymphadenopathy may be 
present.
Fever due to IAI4
Invasive bacterial (inflammatory) 
diarrhea characterized by fever, 
tenesmus, and grossly bloody stool. 
AFI: Acute febrile illness; ARDS: Acute respiratory distress syndrome; BJIs: Bone and joint infections; CAP: Community-acquired pneumonia; COVID-19: Coronavirus disease of 
2019; IAI: Intra-abdominal infection; IP: Incubation period; LRTIs: Lower respiratory tract infections; SARS-CoV-2: Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2; SSTIs: Skin and 
soft tissue infection; URTIs: Upper respiratory tract infections; UTI: Urinary tract infection.
Step 4: Perform Diagnostic Tests 
This step involves performing first-line and confirmatory diagnostic tests depending on the day of 
investigation of the patient and the gravity of the fever. A complete blood count, urine analysis, and 
smear microscopy, and/or rapid diagnostic test (RDT) are important in patients with fever.5 Table 3 lists 
preliminary diagnostic investigations for AUFIs.5 Table 4 lists initial and confirmatory diagnostic tests for 
different AUFIs.5,31–33,35
Table 3: Preliminary diagnostic investigation for AUFIs5
Basic investigations
Diagnostic value*
Suggests severe illness*
Complete blood count
Perform in all patients
 Hematocrit
—
Anemia in patients with malaria, rising 
hematocrit in severe dengue.
 Leukocytosis
Seen often in leptospirosis, enteric fever in 
children, and in scrub typhus. Seen in the 
majority of patients of hepatic amoebiasis.
Leukocytosis may occur in enteric fever 
in adults with onset of complications 
(intestinal perforation), associated with 
severe forms of leptospirosis, scrub 
typhus, malaria, and dengue fever.
 Leukopenia
Leukopenia occurring early in illness and 
in association with thrombocytopenia is 
suggestive of dengue. Seen later in course of 
typhoid fever.
Falling TLC+thrombocytopenia+rising 
hematocrit seen with severe dengue
 Lymphocytosis
May be seen in rickettsial and viral infections
—
 Thrombocytopenia
Thrombocytopenia may be seen in all 
common AUFIs, so poor discriminatory value. 
Thrombocytopenia+splenomegaly suggestive 
of malaria, Thrombocytopenia+bleeding is 
seen in dengue and other VHFs,  
but is unusual in malaria.
Dengue fever: in association with 
bleeding
...Cont’d from last page
Cont’d to next page...
11
Table 3: Preliminary diagnostic investigation for AUFIs5
Basic investigations
Diagnostic value*
Suggests severe illness*
 Eosinophilia
Seen in filariasis, acute schistosomiasis, 
Loeffler’s syndrome
—
Peripheral blood smear 
examination
Perform in all patients if facilities for 
microscopy available
Malaria, borreliosis, filariasis, and acute 
trypanosomiasis can be diagnosed on smear
Parasite density correlates with severity 
in malaria
Urine examination
Perform in severely ill patients.
May be performed, especially in women and elderly, since UTIs may not  
have localizing symptoms
Proteinuria and hematuria seen in 
leptospirosis
Hemoglobinuria in patients with severe 
malaria
Biochemistry
Perform in severely ill patients to assess organ dysfunction.
Hepato-renal involvement is common in leptospirosis, scrub typhus, and malaria, while 
pulmonary-renal syndrome is seen in scrub typhus and leptospirosis
Liver enzymes
Raised in several AUFIs, so no discriminatory 
value
WHO has defined ALT or AST >1000 as 
suggestive of severe dengue
Bilirubin
Raised bilirubin distinguishes malaria from 
dengue
Raised bilirubin+modest rise in transaminases 
(<200 IU/L)+raised CPK seen in leptospirosis
In severe leptospirosis, 
hyperbilirubinemia may be marked (up 
to 300–400 mg/L)
Renal function
AKI common in malaria, scrub typhus, 
leptospirosis.
Non-oliguric renal failure with potassium 
wasting seen in leptospirosis
Correlate with prognosis especially 
when patient has multiorgan 
dysfunction syndrome
Imaging
Perform in patients with tachypnea and/or 
severe illness
 Chest X-ray
Scrub typhus: Pneumonia is most common systemic involvement. Bilateral opacities 
progressing to ARDS may be seen in scrub typhus, leptospirosis, and occasionally in 
malaria. Pneumonia occurs occasionally in enteric fever. Pleural effusion occasional in 
dengue fever (sign of capillary leakage). 
Others: Bilateral nodular opacities or upper lobe cavitating pneumonia in melioidosis
 Ultrasound scan of 
abdomen
May be done in severely ill patients, especially those with jaundice, shock, abdominal 
pain, or persistent fever without obvious cause
May be helpful in diagnosing infections such 
as hepatic amoebiasis, melioidosis (liver and 
splenic abscesses).
Findings such as mesenteric 
lymphadenopathy may help in diagnosis of 
enteric fever
Ascites, pleural effusion, and 
gallbladder wall edema are associated 
with severe dengue infection and are 
signs of plasma leakage.
Acute acalculous cholecystitis and 
acute pancreatitis have been reported 
in all common causes of AUFI
*Alone or in combination with other abnormalities. If confirmatory tests are not available, then the diagnosis may be ’suspected’ at best, if the epidemiological and clinical 
features and results of basic laboratory investigations are compatible. As such, treatment may be started on clinical grounds.
ALT: Alanine aminotransferase; AKI: Acute kidney injury; ARDS: Acute respiratory distress syndrome; AST: Aspartate aminotransferase; AUFI: Acute undifferentiated febrile 
illness; CPK: Creatine phosphokinase; RDT: Rapid diagnostic test. TLC: Total leukocyte count; UTI: Urinary tract infections; VHF: Viral hemorrhagic fevers; WHO: World Health 
Organization.
...Cont’d from last page
12
Table 4: Diagnostic investigation for AUFIs5,31–33,35
Tests
Findings
Test performance
Advantages
Disadvantages
Malaria
RDT for malarial 
antigens (ICT 
format): histidine-rich 
protein 2 (HRP-2), 
Plasmodium lactate 
dehydrogenase 
(pLDH), Plasmodium 
aldolase (pAldolase)
Parasite antigens in blood. 
HRP-2 antigen is unique 
to P. falciparum. pLDH 
can be common to genus 
Plasmodium or specific to  
P. falciparum or P. vivax
~95% sensitive  
and specific for  
P. falciparum. 
Acceptable as 
standalone test for  
P. falciparum. HRP-
2 kits are the most 
sensitive
 Results in minutes, no 
need for laboratory, 
little technical skill 
needed.
 pLDH can be used 
to monitor treatment 
response.
 Low sensitivities for  
low level parasitemia  
(<100 parasites/μL).
 RDTs of different brands vary 
greatly in performance.
 Cannot quantify parasitemia.
 Kits deteriorate above 35°C.
 In areas where HRP-2 deletion 
P. falciparum exist, only pLDH-
based tests are effective.
Confirmatory test: 
microscopy
 Presence of parasites in 
blood.
 Presence of only 
gametocytes suggests 
that current illness is not 
malaria
 Detects as few as 
5–10 parasites per μL 
of blood.
 Turnaround time 
20–30 minutes
Current gold standard: 
inexpensive, quantifies 
parasitemia, identifies 
species
 Needs skilled staff.
 Asymptomatic parasitemia 
in hyperendemic areas can 
confound diagnosis
Dengue
RDT NS1 antigen
NS1 antigen in blood 
collected within 6 days of 
onset
Pooled sensitivity: 66%, 
pooled specificity: 
97.9%
Results in minutes, no 
need for laboratory, 
little technical skill 
needed
Reduced sensitivity in dengue 
serotype 4 infection, and in case 
of previous infection with any 
serotype
RDT IgM
Dengue-specific IgM 
antibody in blood. Many 
RDT kits test NS1 antigen 
and dengue IgM in same 
cassette.
Pooled sensitivity: 83%, 
pooled specificity: 
86% (if taking either 
NS1 or IgM as proof of 
infection)
Results in minutes, no 
need for laboratory 
facilities, little technical 
skill needed
 IgM can persist for months 
and may not appear at all in 
secondary infections.
 Prior exposure to WNV, JE, 
or YF dampens dengue IgM 
response
Confirmatory test: 
culture
Isolation of virus from 
blood or tissue collected 
within 5 days of onset of 
fever
Sensitivity: ~40%, 
specificity: 100%
—
Turnaround time 1–2 weeks, 
expensive
Confirmatory test: 
NAA
Detection of dengue RNA 
in blood or tissue collected 
within 5 days of onset.
Sensitivity: 60%–100%, 
specificity: >95%
Same-day diagnosis 
with nearly 100% 
sensitivity and 
specificity
Expensive
Confirmatory test: 
serology
≥4-fold rise in titer.*
Seroconversion*
Specificity: 100% for  
≥4-fold increased titer 
or seroconversion*
Less expensive than 
culture or NAA
Results are retrospective and of 
no use in management
Enteric fever
RDT for antibody
Detection of antibody 
against Salmonella in 
single serum specimens
Sensitivity: 69%–78%, 
specificity: 77%–90%
Turnaround time  
2–4 hours
Test performance of kits has 
varied widely among studies.  
No RDT for enteric fever is 
accurate enough to replace 
reference tests.
Confirmatory test: 
Culture
Isolation of enteric fever 
Salmonella from blood and 
bone marrow
Sensitivity: 40%–87% in 
blood and 80%  
in marrow,  
specificity: 100%
Isolation allows drug 
sensitivity testing
Turnaround time 3–6 days. 
High level of expertise needed. 
Decreased sensitivity with prior 
therapy
Widal test†
≥4-fold rise in titer*
Sensitivity depends 
on local prevalence, 
specificity: 100%
Affordable
≥4 fold increase may not occur 
in partially treated patients, 
≥4-fold rise can be missed if 
antibody level peaks before first 
specimen is collected.
Cont’d to next page...
13
Table 4: Diagnostic investigation for AUFIs5,31–33,35
Tests
Findings
Test performance
Advantages
Disadvantages
Scrub typhus
RDT for specific IgM  
(ICT format)
Detection of IgM in 
single specimens
Pooled  
sensitivity :66.0%, 
pooled  
specificity: 92.0%
Rapid
 IgM can remain elevated 
over diagnostic cut-off for 12 
months post-infection.
 IgM may not appear in second 
or subsequent attacks.
 Higher specificity means test 
is more useful for ruling in a 
diagnosis of scrub typhus than 
for ruling out.
ELISA for specific 
IgM using 
recombinant 
antigens
≥4-fold rise in titer or 
seroconversion.* 
IgM OD reading above 
a predetermined cut-
off in a single specimen
Sensitivity variable 
(91% seen in a 
study in northern 
Thailand), specificity 
100% for paired 
sera, ≥90% for single 
sera
Simpler, cheaper, 
and more 
reproducible than 
IFA test
Same limitations as for rapid 
IgM tests
Confirmatory test: IFA 
or IPA for antibodies
≥4-fold rise in titer, 
seroconversion*
Specificity 100%
Current gold 
standard
Expensive, laborious, endpoints 
can be subjective
Confirmatory test: 
Weil-Felix test
≥4-fold rise in titer or 
seroconversion* for 
heterophile antibodies 
against Proteus mirabilis 
OX-K strain
Sensitivity variable, 
specificity high for 
paired specimens, 
low for single 
specimens
Inexpensive, 
easy to perform, 
turnaround time 
1 day
Low sensitivity and specificity
Leptospirosis
RDT for IgM
Specific IgM in serum
Sensitivity 13%–22% 
in 1st week, ~60% 
in 2nd week, 
~80% afterward; 
specificity low
Short turnaround 
time of hours, no 
special expertise 
needed
IgM can persist for months. 
False-positive IgM possible 
in co-infection with HIV, EBV, 
hepatitis B or A, and Salmonella 
and Plasmodium spp.
IgM ELISA
Specific IgM in serum
Sensitivity 84% 
in acute phase 
and 86% overall, 
specificity 91% in 
acute phase and 
90% overall
Short turnaround 
time, specific 
enough to rule 
in leptospirosis 
in presence of 
compatible clinical 
picture
IgM can persist for months after 
infection.
Confirmatory 
test: Microscopic 
agglutination test for 
antibody
≥4-fold rise in titer or 
seroconversion*
Sensitivity 41% in  
1st week, 82% in  
2nd–4th week; 
specificity depends 
on cut-off titer 
adopted
Highly sensitive and 
specific
Expensive, high technical skill 
needed. Need to include local 
serotypes in antigen pool to 
ensure satisfactory sensitivity
Confirmatory 
test: Nucleic acid 
amplification
Detection of Leptospira 
DNA in blood, CSF, and 
urine after amplification
Analytical sensitivity 
~105 bacilli/mL 
sample, diagnostic 
sensitivity no data, 
specificity >95%
NAA is only test 
with high sensitivity 
in 1st week of 
illness
Expensive, high technical skill 
needed.
Confirmatory test: 
Culture
Isolation of Leptospira 
spp. from blood, CSF, 
dialysate in first 10 
days, and from urine 
afterward
Sensitivity low, 
specificity 100%
Gold standard. 
Identifies 
pathogenic 
serovars prevalent 
in the locality
Expensive, very slow
...Cont’d from last page
Cont’d to next page...
14
Viral fever34
 Laboratory findings for viral pneumonia:  
RT-PCR positive for the underlying virus,  
elevated lymphocyte counts
 Laboratory findings for COVID-19 fever:   
RT-PCR positive for SARS-CoV-2, lymphopenia, 
elevated aminotransferases, CRP, and D-dimer
 Chest CT findings for viral pneumonia:  Interstitial 
inflammation, high-attenuation reticular patterns, 
localized atelectasis, or pulmonary edema
 Chest CT findings for COVID-19: 
	  Early stage: GGOs
	  Progressive stage: Multiple GGOs, consolidation 
patches, crazy-pavement pattern
	  Advanced stage: Diffuse exudative lesions, 
whiteout lung
Fever due to LRTI36
 X-ray PNS is done usually only if there is a 
chronic sinusitis to look for a fluid level.
 If duration of illness is >10 days with 
purulent nasal discharge, nasal obstruction, 
and facial pain, then a bacterial cause 
should be considered.
Fever due to URTI4,36 
 Examination findings include tonsillo-pharyngeal 
erythema and exudates, palatal petechiae, 
tender anterior cervical adenopathy, and 
sometimes scarlatiniform rash. 
 Confirmation of diagnosis by rapid antigen test or 
throat swab culture is desirable.
Chikungunya
Early disease: Presence of viral RNA by RT 
PCR. 
RT-PCR can also be used to quantify the viral load in the 
blood. CHIKV RNA can be detected during the acute 
phase of illness (≤8 days after symptom onset). 
-
-
-
Confirmatory test:  After first week of illness: 
IgM capture ELISA
-
-
-
-
Japanese encephalitis
Initial test:  IgM capture ELISA
Serum: Sensitivity: 85%–93%, specificity: 96%–98%
CSF: Sensitivity 65%–80%, specificity 89%–100% 
-
-
-
Confirmatory test; Detection of JE virus, 
antigen 
Detection of JE virus, antigen in tissue/blood by 
immunochemistry/PCR. 
-
-
-
*Fourfold or higher rise of specific antibody level in the second of two serum specimens collected 10–14 days apart compared to the first specimen. Seroconversion is the 
presence of antibody above a fixed level in the second of two serum specimens collected 10–14 days apart when none is detectable in the first specimen. †Performing Widal 
test on a single serum specimen has very poor sensitivity and specificity.
Note for dengue fever: (i) NS1 antigen ELISA or RT PCR: for < 5 days of illness; (ii) IgM capture ELISA (MAC-ELISA) for >5 days of illness from blood/serum sample.
AUFIs: Acute undifferentiated febrile illnesses; CSF: Cerebrospinal fluid; ELISA: Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; HIV: Human immunodeficiency virus;  
HRP-2 Histidine-rich protein 2; HRP-2 Histidine-rich protein 2; ICT: Immunochromatographic test; ICT: Immunochromatographic test; IFA: Immunofluorescent assay;  
IgG: Immunoglobulin G; IgG: Immunoglobulin G; IgM: Immunoglobulin M; IPA Immunoperoxidase assay; JE: Japanese encephalitis; NAA: Nucleic acid amplification;  
NS-1: Non-structural antigen 1; RDT: Rapid diagnostic test; YF: Yellow fever.
Figure 4 details the recommended diagnostic tests for different AFIs with localized infections in 
primary care.4,36,37
Figure 4: Diagnostic investigation for AFIs due to localized infection.4,36,37 
Fever due to UTI4
Routine urine analysis: Significant pyuria 
and/or dipstick leukocyte esterase test 
positive.
Fever due to IAI4
 A stool culture is indicated if the patient has 
symptoms lasting for more than 3–7 days 
or is immunosuppressed.
 Microscopic evidence containing red blood 
cells can provide sufficient evidence.
...Cont’d from last page
Cont’d to next page...
15
STEPWISE APPROACH FOR TREATMENT OF ACUTE FEVER IN PRIMARY CARE
Pharmacological and nonpharmacological methods, such as tepid sponging lower temperature in 
patients with acute fever, are useful to relieve discomfort and constitutional symptoms of disease.38,39 
Early presumptive antibiotic therapy is important for suspected bacterial AUFIs, presenting with characteristic 
clinical features. These empirical therapies are necessary if diagnostic confirmatory testing is awaited or not 
available.5 
Management of AUFIs
Figure 5 provides guideline-recommended empirical therapies for different AUFIs.31–33,40–44 For patients with 
severe nonmalarial nonarboviral AUFI, a combination of third-generation cephalosporin plus doxycycline 
as empirical therapy can help manage rickettsioses, leptospirosis, and enteric fever.5 Doxycycline can also 
serve as a companion antimalarial drug to artesunate and ceftriaxone and address concomitant bacterial 
sepsis frequently seen in such patients.5 Due to limited resources in the management of fever and certain 
compelling indications, and empirical use of broad-spectrum antibiotics like doxycycline can be considered 
in the management of acute febrile illness.3
Fever due to SSTI37
 Initial diagnosis involves morphologic features 
of lesion and the clinical setting. If drainage 
or an open wound is present, Gram stain and 
culture can provide a definitive diagnosis.
 In the absence of culture findings, the 
bacterial etiology is difficult to establish. 
Fever due to BJI4
 Leukocytosis, high ESR, and CRP are features 
of septic arthritis.1
 Synovial fluid from the infected joint should be 
sent for WBC counts, Gram stain, and culture 
before starting antibiotics.
 Blood cultures should be obtained for all 
suspected cases of septic arthritis before 
starting antibiotics. 
AFIs: Acute febrile illness; BJIs: Bone and joint infections; COVID-19: Coronavirus disease of 2019; CRP: C-reactive protein; CT: Computed tomography; ESR: Erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate; GGO: Ground-glass opacities; IAI: Intra-abdominal infection; LRTIs: Lower respiratory tract infections; PCR: Polymerase chain reaction; PNS: Paranasal sinus; 
RT: Reverse transcription; SARS-CoV-2: Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2; SSTI: Skin and soft tissue infection; URTIs: Upper respiratory tract infections;  
UTI: Urinary tract infection.
Malaria32,40
Vivax malaria: Chloroquine (25 mg/kg b.w divided over three days, i.e. 10 mg/kg on day 1, 10 mg/kg 
on day 2, and 5 mg/kg on day 3) and primaquine (0.25 mg/kg b.w daily for 14 days) 
Primaquine is used to prevent relapse but is contraindicated in pregnant women and infants.
Falciparum malaria: Artesunate 4 mg/kg body weight daily for 3 days plus sulfadoxine  
(25 mg/kg b.w) and pyrimethamine (1.25 mg/kg b.w) on day 1. This is to be accompanied by  
a single dose of primaquine (0.75 mg/kg b.w) preferably on day 2.
Chemoprophylaxis (<6 weeks): Doxycycline: 100 mg daily in adults and 1.5 mg/kg b.w for  
children more than 8 years old. The drug should be started 2 days before travel and continued  
for 4 weeks after leaving the malarious area. Note: Doxycycline is contraindicated in pregnant  
and lactating women and children less than 8 years.
Figure 5: List of empirical therapies for different AUFIs.31–33,40–44 
...Cont’d from last page
Cont’d to next page...
16
Dengue41
Antipyretics (avoid salicylates/ibuprofen) and 
tepid water sponging if temperature is above 
39oC. Tab paracetamol 10 mg/kg TDS.
Increase fluid intake:
 Children: 50 mL/kg b.w fluids during first  
4–6 hours. Maintenance: 80–100 mL/kg b.w in 
the next 24 hours
 Adults: 2.5–4 L/day 
Chikungunya33
Patient may be treated symptomatically with 
paracetamol.
If the pain is intractable, then NSAIDs,  
such as ibuprofen (400 mg TDS), naproxen  
(250 mg BD), and diclofenac (50 mg BD), can be 
used. To minimize gastric intolerance,  
H2 blockers ranitidine 150 mg BD or proton 
pump inhibitors, such as omeprazole 20 mg OD, 
may be used.
Japanese encephalitis31,44
Paracetamol 15 mg/kg diluted in 50 mL saline 
as retention enema. Oral syrup may be diluted 
1:1 with ordinary water and used. 
Supportive-airway management, seizure 
control, and management of raised intracranial 
pressure.
Leptospirosis43
Adults: Doxycycline 100 mg twice a day for 7 
days.
Pregnant and lactating mothers should be given 
capsule ampicillin 500 mg every 6 hourly.
Children (<8 years): Amoxicillin/ampicillin  
30–50 mg/kg/day in divided doses for 7 days.
Chemoprophylaxis: During the peak 
transmission season doxycycline 200 mg,  
once a week. 
Scrub typhus31
First line: Doxycycline 100 mg BD for 7 days.
Consider azithromycin or rifampicin or 
chloramphenicol as alternatives in children and 
pregnant women.
AUFIs: Acute undifferentiated febrile illnesses; b.w: body weight; BD: Twice a day; COVID-19: Coronavirus disease of 2019; NSAIDs: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs;  
OD: Once a day; TDS: Thrice a day.
Enteric fever42
Oral amoxicillin 25 mg/kg TDS for 10–14 days.
Oral trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole  
4/20 mg/kg BD for 10–14 days.
Management of Acute Fever in RTIs: 
Table 5 lists preferred empiric antibiotic therapy and alternatives for the management of fever due to 
streptococcal pharyngitis and bacterial sinusitis in primary care settings.4
Note: Quinolones are not advised as the first-line treatment option for URTIs. 
...Cont’d from last page
17
Table 5: List of medications for streptococcal pharyngitis and bacterial sinusitis4
Condition
Preferred drug
Alternative
Penicillin allergy
Streptococcal 
pharyngitis
Penicillin V (not easily 
available in India, 
Penicillin G not a 
substitute since oral 
absorption is poor
Amoxicillin
Benzathine 
penicillin single 
dose
Anaphylactic: Clindamycin/clarithromycin/
azithromycin
Non-anaphylactic: Cephalexin/cefadroxil
Bacterial sinusitis
Amoxicillin 
Co-amoxiclav
Ceftriaxone
Cefpodoxime 
(adults)
Adults: Doxycycline/respiratory quinolones
Children: Anaphylactic
respiratory quinolones, Non-anaphylactic: 
Cefixime and clindamycin
Table 6: List of empirical therapies for the management of CAP. A) in adult patients; B) in pediatric 
patients; C) standard dosage4
A
Type of CAP
Preferred drug
Alternative 
Comments
Outpatients without  
comorbidities
Co-amoxiclav
Macrolides**
Cefuroxime
Cefpodoxime
Beta-lactam preferred over macrolides 
due to high prevalence of macrolide 
resistance in S. pneumoniae in India. 
Doxycycline monotherapy not 
recommended
Outpatients with 
comorbidities* or use of 
antimicrobial in 3 months
Co-amoxiclav
and macrolide/
doxycycline
Cefuroxime/
cefpodoxime and 
macrolide/doxycycline
Inpatient, non-ICU
Ceftriaxone with
macrolide/
doxycycline
Cefotaxime/amoxclav 
with macrolide/
doxycycline
If there is hypersensitivity to  
beta-lactams: respiratory 
fluoroquinolones (exclude TB first)
B
Outpatient
Inpatient
Newborns <1 month
Cefotaxime and gentamicin, add macrolides if Chlamydia
suspected (afebrile, staccato cough)
Age less than 5 years
Amoxicillin
Co-amoxiclav
Cefuroxime
Ceftriaxone
Cefotaxime
Co-amoxiclav
Age more than 5 years
Amoxicillin
Macrolide only if clinical features 
suggestive of mycoplasma
Ceftriaxone
Ampicillin
Co-amoxiclav with/without macrolide
Suspected MRSA: add vancomycin/teicoplanin/(linezolid only if TB ruled out)
Suspected influenza: Add oseltamivir
Table 6 lists empiric antibiotic therapy and recommended doses for the management of CAP in adult and 
pediatric patients.4 The use of empiric fluoroquinolone therapy may lead to masking and delayed diagnosis 
of tuberculosis (TB) and promotion of drug resistance, and therefore, fluoroquinolones are not advised for 
CAP patients.4 
Note: Quinolones are not advised for CAP patients and patients with lower RTIs.
Cont’d to next page...
18
C
Drug
Adult dose
Pediatric dose
Penicillin V 
500 mg twice daily 
250 mg twice daily
Benzathine penicillin
<27 kg 6,00,000 units IM single dose
≥27 kg 1.2 million units IM single dose
Amoxicillin
500–1000 mg thrice daily (PO or IV) 
15–20 mg/kg twice daily oral
30–35 mg/kg thrice daily IV
Co-amoxiclav
1 g twice daily/625 mg thrice daily oral
1.2 g IV q8h
15–20 mg/kg of amoxicillin twice daily PO
25–30 mg/kg of amoxicillin component 
thrice daily IV
Azithromycin
 500 mg daily (PO or IV) 
10 mg/kg once daily
Clarithromycin 
500 mg twice daily 
7.5 mg/kg twice daily
Oseltamivir 
75 mg twice daily PO
<15 kg 30 mg twice daily
16–34 kg 45 mg twice daily
35–44 kg 60 mg twice daily
45 kg and more 75 mg twice daily
Doxycycline 
100 mg twice daily 
1.5–2 mg/kg twice daily
Clindamycin
300 mg four times a day PO
600 mg thrice daily IV
7 mg/kg thrice daily
Cephalexin
750 mg twice daily PO
20 mg/kg twice daily PO
Cefadroxil 
1 g once daily 
30 mg/kg once daily
Levofloxacin 
750 mg once daily PO or IV
10–15 mg/kg in one or two divided doses PO 
or IV
Moxifloxacin 
400 mg once daily PO or IV
10 mg/kg once daily PO or IV
Cefpodoxime 
200 mg twice daily 
5 mg/kg twice daily
Cefuroxime
500 mg twice daily oral
1.5 g twice daily IV
10 mg/kg twice daily oral
35 mg/kg twice daily IV
Ceftriaxone 
2 g once daily IV 
50 mg/kg twice daily
Cefotaxime 
2 g thrice daily IV 
30–35 mg/kg thrice daily IV
Cefepime 
2 g twice daily IV 
50 mg/kg twice daily
Piperacillin tazobactam
4.5 g thrice daily
100 mg/kg piperacillin thrice daily
Cefoperazone sulbactam
3 g twice daily
50 mg/kg of cefoperazone twice daily
Imipenem
1 g thrice daily or 500 mg four times 
daily IV
15–25 mg/kg four times daily IV
Meropenem
1 g thrice daily IV 
20–40 mg/kg thrice daily
Vancomycin 
1 gm twice daily 
10 mg/kg four times daily
Teicoplanin
400 mg twice daily for 3 doses and 
then 400 mg once daily
12 mg/kg twice daily for 3 doses and then  
12 mg/kg once daily
Linezolid
600 mg twice daily PO or IV
10 mg/kg thrice daily PO or IV
*Chronic heart, liver, renal, or lung disease, diabetes mellitus, malignancies, alcoholism, or use of immunosuppressive drugs.**Azithromycin/clarithromycin.
The empiric addition of oseltamivir in patients with CAP should be considered in the setting of an influenza outbreak. 
CAP: Community-acquired pneumonia; IV: Intravenous; MRSA: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; PO: Oral administration; TB: Tuberculosis.
...Cont’d from last page
19
Management of Acute Fever in SSTIs 
Table 7 lists the preferred empiric antibiotic therapy for the management of SSTIs.4
Table 7: List of empirical therapies for management of SSTIs4
Condition
Organism
Antibiotic
Duration
Comments
Cellulitis
S. pyogenes
S. aureus
Cefazolin
OR cephalexin OR
Amoxicillin-
clavulanate
+/– clindamycin
5–7 days (longer if 
clinically indicated)
 Obtain blood/pus  
S. aureus-Consider 
polymicrobial 
pathogens in diabetics
 Consider risk 
factors for MRSA 
and presence of 
TSS before using 
clindamycin
Necrotizing 
fasciitis
S. pyogenes
S. aureus, anaerobes,  
Gram-negative organisms
(polymicrobial)
Piperacillin- 
tazobactam+ 
Clindamycin
Generally, 14 days 
if adequate source 
control achieved
 Early surgical
debridement essential
Send blood and
intraoperative
specimens for
bacterial cultures
Consider use of IVIG
for streptococcal
NF/TSS
Necrotizing 
fasciitis
Aeromonas/V. vulnificus
(suspect when history of 
exposure to fresh water or 
salt water respectively)
Ciprofoxacin+
Doxycycline
Generally, 14 days 
if adequate source 
control achieved
Erysipelas
Propionibacterium acnes/
MSSA
Amoxicillin-
clavulanate
5–7 days
Abscess
S. pyogenes,
Oral anaerobes
Clindamycin or
Ampicillin- 
sulbactum
OR Amoxicillin-
clavulanate
5–7 days
S. aureus, facultative  
Gram-negative anaerobes
Linezolid OR 
Vancomycin
PLUS
Ciprofloxacin
Generally, 14 days
Fever Presentation With Suspected COVID-1932,45
[COVID-19 clinical management: living guidance; Guidelines for the management of co-infection of 
COVID-19 with other seasonal epidemic prone diseases]
 Antibiotic therapy or prophylaxis should not be used in patients with mild COVID-19.
 For suspected or confirmed moderate COVID-19, antibiotics should not be prescribed unless there is 
clinical suspicion of a bacterial infection.
 For COVID-19 patients with severe disease, it is important to collect blood cultures prior to the initiation 
of antimicrobial therapy.
 Consider in older people, and children <5 years of age to provide empiric antibiotic treatment for 
possible pneumonia.
 Consider antibiotics, such as co-amoxicillin, adequate, instead of broad-spectrum antibiotics.
Note: Quinolones are not advised for patients with respiratory tract infections.
Cont’d to next page...
20
Management of Acute Fever in IAIs
Table 8 lists preferred empiric antibiotic therapy for the management of diarrhea.4 Adults with bloody 
diarrhea should be treated promptly with an antimicrobial therapy that is effective against Shigella; can 
otherwise be associated with severe complications.4 
Antibiotics 
Doses, duration, and route of administration
Cefazolin 
1-2 g IV q8h
Cephalexin
750 mg bd, 500 mg TID
Amoxicillin-clavulanate
Oral: 1 g bd/ IV 1.2@g TDS
Clindamycin
600-900 IV 8 hourly
Piperacillin-tazobactam+Clindamycin
IV 4.5 g 6 hourly (P-T)+IV 600 mg TDS (Clinda)
Ciprofoxacin
IV 750 mg q12h
Doxycycline
IV 200 mg stat f/b 100 mg 1-0-1
Amoxicillin-clavulanate
1 g bd
bd: Twice a day; IV: Intravenous; MSSA: Methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus; SSTIs: Skin and soft tissue infections; TDS: Thrice a day; TID: Three times a day.
Table 8: List of empirical therapies for management of diarrhea4
Suspected cause
Antibiotic
V. Cholerae
Doxycycline (not recommended in children and pregnant women) 300 mg once
Azithromycin 1 g as a single dose
Shigella
Ciprofloxacin 500 mg b.i.d. for 3 days
Alternatively, ceftriaxone 2 g IV as single dose
Amoebiasis
Metronidazole 500 mg t.i.d. for 5 days
Giardiasis
Metronidazole 250 mg t.i.d. for 5 days
Campylobacter
Azithromycin 500 mg for 3days
b.i.d.: Twice a day; IV: Intravenous; t.i.d.: Three times a day.
Management of Acute Fever in BJIs  
The most common bacteria causing septic arthritis are Gram-positive Staphylococcus aureus. Table 9 lists 
the preferred empiric antibiotic therapy for the management of BJIs caused due to Staphylococcus 
aureus.4
Table 9: List of empirical therapies for the management of BJIs caused due to Staphylococcus aureus4 
Organism
Drugs of 
pediatric dose
Alternative drugs
Remarks
MSSA
Cloxacillin
Flucloxacillin
Cefazolin
Ceftriaxone
Daptomycin
Rifampicin 300–450 mg PO/day may be added in 
the presence of hardware
Possible antagonism with beta-lactams.  
Best results if along with FQN (FQN use is unlikely 
in India due to widespread resistance)
MSSA
Vancomycin
Teicoplanin
Daptomycin
Linezolid
Rifampicin 300–450 mg PO/day (as above)
High dose of vancomycin used 15–20 mg/kg  
q8–12h (max. 2 g/dose). Monitor trough levels, 
renal function
...Cont’d from last page
Cont’d to next page...
21
Management of Acute Fever in UTIs
Table 10 lists preferred empiric antibiotic therapy for the management of acute cystitis and acute 
pyelonephritis.4
Drugs of choice
Doses
Cloxacillin
2 g q4-6h
Flucloxacillin
2 g q4-6h
Cefazolin
2 g q8h
Ceftriaxone
2–4 g q2–4h
Vancomycin
1 5 mg/kg q12h
Teicoplanin
12 mg/kg q12h x 3 doses; followed by 12 mg/kg/d
Daptomycin
8–10 mg/kg/d (MRSA)
Linezolid
600 mg q12h
BJIs: Bone and joint infections; MRSA: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; MSSA: Methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus; PO: Oral administration; 
Antibiotics
Doses, duration, and route of administration
Acute cystitis
1. Nitrofurantoin
100 mg BD for 5 days
2. Nitrofurantoin
1.25–1.75 mg/kg oral 6 hourly (Dose in children)
3. Fosfomycin
3.0 g single dose
4. Co-trimoxazole
ds 1 tab bd for 3 days
5. Ertapenem
1 g IV once daily for 7 days
6. Amikacin
15 mg/kg/day once daily IV or IM for 3 days
Acute pyelonephritis
7. Piperacillin–tazobactam
4.5 g IV 6 hrs
8. Ertapenem
1 g IV once dailyfor 7–10 days
9. Imipenem
1 g 8 hourly IV
10. Meropenem
1 g IV q8h
11. Amikacin
15 mg/kg/day once daily IV/IM for 7–14 days
BD: Twice a day: IM: Intramuscular; IV: Intravenous; UTIs: Urinary tract infections.
Table 10: List of empirical therapies for the management of acute cystitis and acute pyelonephritis4
Urinary syndrome
Drug of choice
Alternative choice
Comments
Acute cystitis
 Nitrofurantoin
 Fosfomycin
 Co-trimoxazole
 Ertapenem
 Amikacin (can be 
used in children 
as well)
 Dosage adjustment as per eGFR.
 Fosfomycin and nitrofurantoin should be avoided 
when there is suspicion of pyelonephritis or 
prostatitis/presence of systemic features of 
infection.
 Fosfomycin susceptibility to being requested for, 
and used only for Gram-negative MDR organisms.
Acute 
pyelonephritis
 Piperacillin–
tazobactam
 Ertapenem
 Imipenem
 Meropenem
 Amikacin 
(recommended 
for children as 
well)
 Dosage adjustment as per eGFR.
 Treatment is for a minimum of 7 days.
 The total duration of treatment is 14 days in children.
 Same treatment regimen to be used for 
complicated UTI except the duration is extended 
(7–14 days).
...Cont’d from last page
22
Do’s and Don’ts of Fever Management 
 Antibiotics should not be prescribed during strong suspicion of viral fever.4 
 It is important to draw two sets of blood cultures before the start of empiric 
antibiotic therapy. 
 Start antibiotics for a presumed bacterial infection promptly, but adjust the dosage 
and duration, switch, or end antibiotic therapy when results do not support or  
justify the need to continue. Check the situation within 48 hours based on test 
results and patient status.4  
 Supportive therapy with acetaminophen (650 mg every 6 hours) is advisable, 
accompanied by tepid sponging.4 
 It is important to avoid indiscriminate use of antibiotic agents, nonsteroidal 
anti‑inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and steroids in patients with AUFIs in  
primary care. 
 Corticosteroids are not recommended in the treatment of AUFIs.4 
 Patients should be prescribed a soft 
bland diet loaded with immune-boosting 
foods, which help toughen the immune 
system.46–48
 It is important to include foods that are 
easily digested and absorbed, such as 
cereal and milk, soft fruits (banana, papaya, 
orange), mashed khichidi, mashed curd 
rice, or softly boiled veggies. Nonvegetarian 
foods, deep-fried foods, processed foods, 
alcohol, and tobacco should be avoided.46–48
 Adequate sleep, reduced stress, and 
proper exercise should be ensured for 
quicker recovery. Sufficient oral hydration (a 
minimum fluid intake of 50 mL/kg of body 
weight in 24 hours) should be maintained to 
prevent dehydration.46–48
Nutrition and Fluid Management Key Points to Consider
23
CONCLUSION
 Acute fever is classified into AUFIs without organ- or system-specific signs at the onset 
and AFIs due to localized infections with system-specific signs.
 The diagnosis of acute fever in primary care is not always possible based on the clinical 
presentation alone, and correct diagnosis is reached only with specific diagnostic tests. 
 A stepwise evaluation considering the diagnostic possibilities in the geographical area 
and clinical symptoms of different acute fever types with special consideration to patient 
characteristics can help in the accurate diagnosis and management of patients.
 Use of this evidence-based algorithm can help guide primary care specialists to 
use relevant diagnostic modalities and initiate early empiric therapy based on clinical 
syndromes for better management of fever.
 Use of stepwise management algorithm can help healthcare professionals make 
wise informed decisions and reduce the irrational prescription of antibiotics and 
antimalarial agents.
REFERENCES
1.	
Salvi S, Apte K, Madas S, et al. Symptoms and medical conditions in 204 912 patients visiting primary health-care practitioners 
in India: a 1-day point prevalence study (the POSEIDON study). Lancet Glob Health. 2015;3(12):e776–e784. DOI:10.1016/S2214-
109X(15)00152-7. 
2.	
Shah R. Evaluation of fever management practices in rural India. Int J Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2020. 323–330. 10.19070/2167-910X-
2000051.
3.	
Aggarwal KK. Management of acute febrile illness: doxycycline, the empirical antibiotic of choice. Available at:  https://ijcp.in/
Admin/CMS/PDF/4.%20Editorial_IJCP_NOV18.pdf. Accessed on: 31 August 2021.
4.	
Aggarwal S, Walia K, et al. Treatment guidelines for antimicrobial use in common syndromes 2019 (2nd edition). Available at: 
https://main.icmr.nic.in/sites/default/files/guidelines/Treatment_Guidelines_2019_Final.pdf. Accessed on: 31 August 2021.
5.	
Bhargava A, Ralph R, Chatterjee B, et al. Assessment and initial management of acute undifferentiated fever in tropical and 
subtropical regions. BMJ. 2018;363: k4766. Published 2018 Nov 29. DOI:10.1136/bmj. k4766.
6.	
Mørch K, Manoharan A, Chandy S, et al. Acute undifferentiated fever in India: a multicentre study of aetiology and diagnostic 
accuracy. BMC Infect Dis. 2017;17(1):665. Published 2017 Oct 4. DOI:10.1186/s12879-017-2764-3.
7.	
Bhatt S, Gething PW, Brady OJ, et al. The global distribution and burden of dengue. Nature. 2013;496(7446):504–507. DOI:10.1038/
nature12060.
8.	
Chrispal A, Boorugu H, Gopinath KG, et al. Acute undifferentiated febrile illness in adult hospitalized patients: the disease spectrum 
and diagnostic predictors - an experience from a tertiary care hospital in South India. Trop Doct. 2010;40(4):230–234. DOI:10.1258/
td.2010.100132.
9.	
Mittal G, Ahmad S, Agarwal RK, et al. Aetiologies of acute undifferentiated febrile illness in adult patients - an experience from a 
Tertiary Care Hospital in Northern India. J Clin Diagn Res. 2015;9(12): DC22–DC24. DOI: 10.7860/JCDR/2015/11168.6990.
10.	  Hersch EC, Oh RC. Prolonged febrile illness and fever of unknown origin in adults. Am Fam Physician. 2014;90(2):91–96.
11.	
Cunha BA, Lortholary O, Cunha CB. Fever of unknown origin: a clinical approach.  Am J Med. 2015;128(10): 1138.e1–1138.e15. 
DOI: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2015.06.001.
12.	
Schellack N, Schellack, G. An overview of the management of fever and its possible complications in infants and toddlers. 
SA Pharm J. 2018. 85. 26–33.
13.	
Wangdi K, Kasturiaratchi K, Nery SV, et al. Diversity of infectious aetiologies of acute undifferentiated febrile illnesses in south and 
Southeast Asia: a systematic review. BMC Infect Dis. 2019;19(1):577. Published 2019 Jul 4. DOI:10.1186/s12879-019-4185-y.
14.	
Uthaya SMK, Perumbadi L, Shenbagaram K, et al. Clinical and etiological profile of acute undifferentiated fever in patients 
admitted to a teaching hospital in Pondicherry. Int J Med Res Rev. 2018; 6:259–265.
15.	
Sulis G, Daniels B, Kwan A, et al. Antibiotic overuse in the primary health care setting: a secondary data analysis of standardised 
patient studies from India, China and Kenya. BMJ Glob Health. 2020;5(9):e003393. DOI:10.1136/bmjgh-2020-003393.
16.	 Ogoina D. Fever, fever patterns and diseases called ‘fever’--a review.  J Infect Public Health. 2011;4(3):108–124. DOI: 10.1016/j.
jiph.2011.05.002
17.	
Temperature measurement in paediatrics. Paediatr Child Health. 2000;5(5):273–284. DOI:10.1093/pch/5.5.273.
18.	 Cheshire WP Jr. Thermoregulatory disorders and illness related to heat and cold stress. Auton Neurosci. 2016; 196:91–104. DOI: 
10.1016/j.autneu.2016.01.001.
24
19.	 Batra P, Saha A, Faridi MM. Thermometry in children. J Emerg Trauma Shock. 2012;5(3):246–249. DOI:10.4103/0974-2700.99699.
20.	 Najmi A, Kaore S, Ray A, et al.  Use of handheld infrared thermometers in COVID-19 pandemic for mass screening: Understanding 
its implications through a case report. J Family Med Prim Care. 2020;9(10):5421–5422. Published 2020 Oct 30. DOI: 10.4103/jfmpc.
jfmpc_1764_20
21.	
IMA Mercury Phase Out Policy. Available at: https://www.ima-india.org/ima/free-way-page.php?pid=445. Accessed on: 
03 September 2021.
22.	 Digital Thermometer vs Mercury Thermometer: Which is better? Available at: https://buythermopro.com/knowledge/digital-
thermometer-vs-mercury-thermometer/. Accessed on: 03 September 2021.
23.	 Mohapatra S. Sterilization and Disinfection. Essentials of Neuroanesthesia. 2017;929-944. 
24.	 Hemorrhagic Fever With Renal Failure Syndrome  Clinical Presentation. Available at: https://emedicine.medscape.com/
article/982142-clinical#:~:text=The%20clinical%20features%20in%20hemorrhagic,nausea%2C%20vomiting%2C%20and%20
diarrhea. Accessed on: 03 September 2021.
25.	 Mullins MF. Malignant Hyperthermia: A Review. J Perianesth Nurs. 2018;33(5):582–589. DOI: 10.1016/j.jopan.2017.04.008
26.	 Verdoux H, Quiles C, de Leon J. Clinical determinants of fever in clozapine users and implications for treatment management: 
A narrative review. Schizophr Res. 2019; 211:1–9. DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2019.07.040.
27.	
Khanna K, Liu DR. Acute rheumatic fever: An evidence-based approach to diagnosis and initial management. Pediatr Emerg Med 
Pract. 2016;13(8):1–23.
28.	 High KP, Bradley SF, Gravenstein S, et al. Clinical practice guideline for the evaluation of fever and infection in older adult 
residents of long-term care facilities: 2008 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America.  Clin Infect Dis. 2009;48(2): 
149–171. DOI:10.1086/595683
29.	 Fever in Pregnancy. Available at: http://www.antimicrobe.org/e42.asp. Accessed on: 03 September 2021.
30.	 Can a Fever During Pregnancy Harm My Baby? Available at: https://www.healthline.com/health/pregnancy/could-fever-harm-
my-baby#Why-am-I-running-a-fever?. Accessed on: 03 September 2021.
31.	
The Indian Society of Critical Care Medicine Tropical Fever Group, Singhi S, Chaudhary D, et al. Tropical fevers: Management 
guidelines. Indian J Crit Care Med. 2014;18(2):62-69. DOI:10.4103/0972–5229.126074.
32.	 Guidelines for management of co-infection of COVID-19 with other seasonal epidemic prone diseases. Available at: https://www.
mohfw.gov.in/pdf/GuidelinesformanagementofcoinfectionofCOVID19withotherseasonalepidemicpronediseases.pdf. Accessed 
on: 03 September 2021.
33.	 National guideline for clinical management of chikungunya. Available at: https://nvbdcp.gov.in/WriteReadData/
l892s/77728737401531912419.pdf. Accessed on: 03 September 2021.
34.	 Sharma R, Agarwal M, Gupta M, et al. Clinical characteristics and differential clinical diagnosis of novel coronavirus disease 2019 
(COVID-19). Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). 2020;55–70. Published 2020 Apr 30. DOI:10.1007/978-981-15-4814-7_6.
35.	 National Health Mission. Guidelines for management of Japanese encephalitis. Available at: https://nhm.gov.in/images/pdf/
guidelines/nrhm-guidelines/stg/japanese-encephalitis.pdf. Accessed on: 03 September 2021.
36.	 ICMR Antimicrobial Guidelines for Upper Respiratory Tract Infections. Available at: https://speciality.medicaldialogues.in/icmr-
antimicrobial-guidelines-for-upper-respiratory-tract-infections. Accessed on: 03 September 2021.
37.	
Cellulitis: Definition, Etiology, Diagnosis and Treatment. Available at: https://journalofethics.ama-assn.org/article/cellulitis-
definition-etiology-diagnosis-and-treatment/2006-12. Accessed on: 03 September 2021.
38.	 Acute Fever of Indeterminate Cause. Available at: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-81-322-2710-6_42#:~:text=A%20
fever%20of%20less%20than,(AFIC)%20%5B4%5D. Accessed on: 03 September 2021.
39.	 Kamel Escalante MC, Abdennour A, Farah A, et al. Prescription patterns of analgesics, antipyretics, and non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs for the management of fever and pain in pediatric patients: A cross-sectional, multicenter study in Latin 
America, Africa, and the Middle East. Pragmat Obs Res. 2019; 10:41–51. Published 2019 Aug 15. DOI:10.2147/POR.S168140.
40.	 Guidelines for diagnosis and treatment of malaria in India. Available at: https://nvbdcp.gov.in/WriteReadData/
l892s/20627628441542176662.pdf. Accessed on: 03 September 2021.
41.	
National Health Mission. Guidelines for management of dengue fever. Available at: https://www.nhm.gov.in/images/pdf/
guidelines/nrhm-guidelines/stg/dengue.pdf. Accessed on: 03 September 2021.
42.	 National Health Mission. Guidelines for management of enteric fever. Available at: https://nhm.gov.in/images/pdf/guidelines/
nrhm-guidelines/stg/enteric-fever.pdf. Accessed on: 03 September 2021.
43.	 National Guidelines Diagnosis, Case Management Prevention and Control of Leptospirosis. Available at: https://ncdc.gov.in/
WriteReadData/l892s/File558.pdf. Accessed on: 03 September 2021.
44.	 National Health Mission. Guidelines for management of Japanese encephalitis. Available at: https://nhm.gov.in/images/pdf/
guidelines/nrhm-guidelines/stg/japanese-encephalitis.pdf. Accessed on: 03 September 2021.
45.	 COVID-19 Clinical management: living guidance. Available at: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoV-
clinical-2021-1. Accessed on: 03 September 2021.
46.	 Diet During Fever in Children. Available at: http://www.nutritionvista.com/NutritionBuzz/diet-during-fever-in-children,115.aspx/. 
Accessed on: 03 September 2021.
47.	
Typhoid Fever: Dietary Management And Foods To Avoid During Typhoid Fever. Available at: https://www.netmeds.com/health-
library/post/typhoid-fever-dietary-management-and-foods-to-avoid-during-typhoid-fever. Accessed on: 03 September 2021.
48.	 Indian Dietetic association: Guidance for COVID-19 patients. Available at: http://idaindia.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/
Nutrition-Guidelines-for-COVID-19-Patients.pdf. Accessed on: 03 September 2021.
Dr. Reddy’s Laboratories Ltd., 
7-1-27, Ameerpet, Hyderabad–500 016. 
Toll-Free No.: 1800 425 0014;  Website: https://www.drreddys.com; 
Email: customerservices@drreddys.com  
Disclaimer:  The matter published herein has been developed by clinicians and medical writers. It has also been validated by experts. Although great care has been taken in compiling and checking the information, 
the authors, BioQuest and its servants or agents, and sponsors shall not be responsible or in any way, liable for any errors, omissions or inaccuracies in this publication whether arising from negligence or otherwise 
however, or for any consequences arising therefrom. The inclusion or exclusion of any product does not mean that the publisher advocates or rejects its use either generally or in any particular field or fields.
For the use of a Registered Medical Practitioner, Hospital or Laboratory only. All content including: text, images,  or other formats were created for medical educational purposes only. Offerings for continuing education 
are clearly identified and the appropriate target audience is identified. This communication is restricted for the use of HCPs and must not be shared in public domain. The opinions expressed in this are solely the views 
of the speaker. The presentation may contain off label usage of drug(s) aimed at educational purpose only. Dr. Reddy’s Laboratories Ltd including but not limited its Affiliates strictly does not recommend any off label 
usage of its marketing products. Prior to treatment kindly refer to the latest prescribing information approved by the local authorities. No part of this content may be used, reproduced, transmitted or stored in any form 
without the written permission of Dr. Reddy’s.
